

 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : about and contents - Page 1 :
 2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : about and contents - Page 2 :
 First Edition
February 2006  Phalguna 1927
Reprinted
October 2006, November 2007,
January 2009, January 2010,
January 2011, January 2012,
December 2012, December 2013,
December 2014, May 2016,
March 2017, December 2017,
January  2019, September 2019,
February 2021, November 2021
Revised Edition
November 2022 Kartika 1944
Reprinted
March 2024 Chaitra 1946
PD 270T SU
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006, 2022
` 240.00
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,  re-
sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form
of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication
: Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Editor
: Shveta Uppal
Chief Production
: Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business
: Amitabh Kumar
Manager (In charge)
Assistant Editor
: Shashi Chadha
Assistant Production
: Om Prakash
Officer
Cover and Layout
Shweta Rao
Illustrations
Lalit Maurya
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bangaluru 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by the
Secretary, National Council of Educational
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at
Raas Technoprint, A-93, Sector -65,
Noida-201 301 (UP)
ISBN  81-7450-496-6
11080 – BIOLOGY
Textbook for Class XI
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : about and contents - Page 3 :
 FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF) 2005, recommends that children’s life at
school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure
from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system and causes
a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed
on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt
to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different
subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly further in the direction
of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on
Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teachers
will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue
imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space, time and
freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information passed
on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of examination
is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as
participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning.
Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual
calendar so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching.
The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how effective this
textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, rather than a
source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address the problem of
curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different stages with
greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The
textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to
opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and
activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates
the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this book.
We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in science and mathematics,
Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book, Professor K. Muralidhar,
Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi for guiding the work of this committee.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : about and contents - Page 4 :
 Several teachers contributed to the development of this textbook. We are grateful to
their principals for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and
organisations which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources,
material and personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National
Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher
Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and
contribution.
As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement
in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which
will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi
 National Council of Educational
20 December 2005
Research and Training
(iv)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : about and contents - Page 5 :
 In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on students. The
National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the content load and providing
opportunities for experiential learning with creative mindset. In this background, the NCERT
has undertaken the exercise to rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes
already developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken into consideration in this
exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:
•
Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the same class
•
Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject
•
Difficulty level
•
Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions from teachers
and can be learned by children through self-learning or peer-learning
•
Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes given above.
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOK
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : about and contents - Page 6 :
 2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : about and contents - Page 7 :
 CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Chairman, Advisory Committee, Inter University Centre for
Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCAA), Pune University, Pune
CHIEF ADVISOR
K. Muralidhar, Professor, Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi
MEMBERS
Ajit Kumar Kavathekar, Reader (Botany), Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, Delhi
B.B.P. Gupta, Professor, Department of Zoology, North-Eastern Hill University, Shillong
C.V. Shimray, Lecturer, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
Dinesh Kumar, Reader, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
J.S. Gill, Professor, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
K. Sarath Chandran, Reader (Zoology), Sri Venkateswara College, University of Delhi, Delhi
Nalini Nigam, Reader (Botany), Ramjas College, University of Delhi, Delhi
Pratima Gaur, Professor, Department of Zoology, University of Allahabad, Allahabad
Ratnam Kaul Wattal, Reader (Botany), Zakir Hussain College, University of Delhi, Delhi
R.K. Seth, UGC Scientist  C, Department of Zoology, University of Delhi, Delhi
R.P. Singh, Lecturer (Biology), Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Kishan Ganj, Delhi
Sangeeta Sharma, PGT (Biology), Kendriya Vidyalaya, JNU, New Delhi
Savithri Singh, Principal, Acharya Narendra Dev College, University of Delhi; Former Fellow, Centre
for Science Education and Communication, University of Delhi, Delhi
S.C. Jain, Professor, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT
Sunaina Sharma, Lecturer (Biology), Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Dwarka, New Delhi
Tejinder Chawla, PGT (Biology), Guru Harkrishan Public School, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi
T.N. Lakhanpal, Professor (Retd.), Department of Bio Sciences, Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla
U.K. Nanda, Professor, Regional Institute of Education, Bhubaneshwar
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
B.K. Tripathi, Reader, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT.
TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : about and contents - Page 8 :
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) gratefully acknowledges
the contribution of the individuals and organisations involved in the development of the
Biology textbook for Class XI. The Council is grateful to Arvind Gupte, Principal (Retd.),
Government Collegiate Education Services, Madhya Pradesh;  Shailaja Hittalmani,
Associate Professor (Genetics), University of Agricultural Sciences, Bangalore;
K.R. Shivanna, Professor (Retd.), Department of Botany, University of Delhi, Delhi; R.S.
Bedwal, Professor, Department of Zoology, University of Rajasthan, Jaipur; P.S.
Srivastava, Professor, Department of Biotechnology, Hamdard University, New Delhi and
Pramila Shivanna, former Teacher, D.A.V. School, Delhi, for their valuable suggestions.
The Council is also thankful to V.K. Bhasin, Professor and Head, Department of Zoology,
University of Delhi, Delhi;  P.P. Bakre, Professor and Head, Department of Zoology,
University of Rajasthan, Jaipur and Savithri Singh, Principal, Acharya Narendra Dev
College, New Delhi for their support. The Council is also grateful to B.K. Gupta, Scientist,
Central Zoo Authority, New Delhi for providing pictures of zoological parks and
Sameer Singh for the pictures on the front and back cover. All the other photographs
used in the book provided by Savithri Singh and taken at either at NCERT, IARI Campus
or Acharya Narendra Dev College is gratefully acknowledged.
NCERT sincerely acknowledges the contributions of the members who participated in
the review of the manuscripts – M.K. Tiwari, PGT (Biology), Kendriya Vidyalaya, Mandsaur,
Madhya Pradesh; Maria Gracias Fernandes, PGT (Biology), G.V.M.S. Higher Secondary,
Ponda, Goa; A.K. Ganguly, PGT (Biology), Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya, Roshnabad,
Haridwar; Shivani Goswami, PGT (Biology), The Mother’s International School, New Delhi
and B.N. Pandey, Principal, Ordinance Factory Sr. Sec. School, Dehradun.
The Council is highly thankful to M. Chandra, Professor and Head, DESM; Hukum
Singh, Professor, DESM, NCERT for their valuable support throughout the making of
this book. The contributions of V.V. Anand, Professor (Retd), Regional Institute of
Education (RIE), Mysuru; A.K. Mohapatra, Professor, RIE, Bhubaneswar; Abhay Kumar,
Assistant Professor, CIET, NCERT; G.V. Gopal, Professor, RIE, Mysuru; Ishwant Kaur,
AHM, DMS, Ajmer; Sunita Farkya, Professor, DESM, NCERT; Pushplata Verma, Assistant
Professor, DESM, NCERT; C. Padmaja, Professor, RIE, Mysuru and Jaydeep Mandal,
Professor, RIE, Bhopal in the review of this textbook in 2017-18 are acknowledged.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contribution of Deepak Kapoor,
Incharge, Computer Station; Mohd. Khalid Raza and Arvind Sharma, DTP operators;
Saswati Banerjee and Hari Darshan Lodhi, Copy Editor; Archana Srivastava, Proof
Reader and APC office and administrative staff of DESM, NCERT.
The efforts of the Publication Department, NCERT in bringing out this publication
are also appreciated.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : about and contents - Page 9 :
 A NOTE FOR THE TEACHERS AND STUDENTS
Biology is the science of life. It is the story of life on earth. It is the science of life forms and
living processes. Biological systems, often appear to challenge physical laws that govern the
behaviour of matter and energy in our world. Historically, biological knowledge was ancillary
to knowledge of human body and its function. The latter as we know, is the basis of medical
practice. However, parts of biological knowledge developed independent of human application.
Fundamental questions about origin of life, the origin and growth of biodiversity, the evolution
of flora and fauna of different habitats, etc., caught the imagination of biologists.
The very description of living organisms, be it from morphological perspective, physiological
perspective, taxonomical perspective, etc., engaged scientists to such an extent that for sheer
convenience, if not for anything else, the subject matter got artificially divided into the sub-
disciplines of botany and zoology and later into even microbiology. Meanwhile, physical sciences
made heavy inroads into biology, and established biochemistry and biophysics as new sub-
disciplines of biology. Mendel’s work and its rediscovery in the early twentieth century led to
the promotion of study of genetics. The discovery of the double-helical structure of DNA and
the deciphering of three dimensional structures of many macromolecules led to the
establishment of and phenomenal growth in the dominating area of molecular biology. In a
sense, functional disciplines laying emphasis on mechanisms underlying living processes,
received more attention, support, intellectual and social recognition. Biology,  unfortunately,
got divided into classical and modern biology. To the majority of practising biologists, pursuit
of biological research became more empirical rather than a curiosity and hypothesis driven
intellectual exercise as is the case with theoretical physics, experimental physics, structural
chemistry and material science. Fortunately and quietly, general unifying principles of biology
were also being discovered, rediscovered and emphasised. The work of Mayr, Dobhzhansky,
Haldane, Perutz, Khorana, Morgan, Darlington, Fisher and many others brought respect and
seriousness to both classical and molecular biological disciplines. Ecology and Systems biology
got established as unifying biological disciplines. Every area of biology began developing
interface with not only other areas of biology but also other disciplines of science and
mathematics. Pretty soon, the boundaries became porous. They are now on the verge of
disappearing altogether. Progress in human biology, biomedical sciences, especially the
structure, functioning and evolution of human brain brought in respect, awe and philosophical
insights to biology. Biology even stepped out of laboratories, museums and natural parks and
raised social, economic and cultural issues capturing the imagination of general public and
hence political attention. Educationists did not lag behind and realised that biology should be
taught as an interdisciplinary and integrating science at all stages of educational training
especially at school and undergraduate levels. A new synthesis of all areas of basic and
applied areas of biology is the need of the hour. Biology has come of age. It has an independent
set of concepts which are universal just like physics and chemistry and mathematics.
The present volume is the first time presentation of the integrated biology for the school
level children.  One of the lacunae in biology teaching and study is the absence of integration
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : about and contents - Page 10 :
 with other disciplinary knowledge of physics, chemistry etc. Further many processes in plants,
animals and microbes are similar when looked from physico-chemical perspective. Cell biology
has brought out the unifying common cellular level activities underlying apparently diverse
phenomena across plants, animals and microbes. Similarly, molecular science (e.g.
biochemistry or molecular biology) has revealed the similar molecular mechanisms in all
these apparently diverse organisms like plants, animals and microbes. Phenomena like
respiration, metabolism, energy utlisation, growth, reproduction and development can be
discussed in a unifying manner rather than as separate unrelated processes in plants and
animals. An attempt has been made to unify such diverse disciplines in the book. The
integration achieved however, is partial and not complete. Hopefully along with changes in
the teaching and learning context, to be brought out in the next few years, the next edition of
this book will reveal more integration of botany, zoology and microbiology and truly reflect the
true nature of biology – the future science of man by man and for man.
This new textbook of Biology for class XI is a completely rewritten book in view of the
syllabus revision and restructuring. It is also in accordance with the spirit of the National
Curriculum Framework (2005) guidelines. The subject matter is presented under twenty-two
chapters which are grouped under five thematic units. Each unit has a brief write up preceding
the unit highlighting the essence of the chapters to follow under that unit. Each unit also has
a biographical sketch of a prominent scientist in that area. Each chapter has, on the first
page, a detailed table of contents giving sub-headings within the chapter. Decimal system
using arabic numerals has been employed to indicate these sub-headings. At the end of each
chapter a brief summary is provided. This brings to the notice of the student, what she/he is
supposed to have learnt by studying the chapter. A set of questions is also provided at the
conclusion of each chapter. These questions are essentially to enable the student to test
herself/himself as to how much she/he has understood the subject matter. There are questions
which are purely of information recall type; there are questions which need analytical thinking
to answer and hence test true understanding; there are questions which are problems to
solve and finally there are questions which need analysis and speculation as there is no one
to answer to such questions. This tests the critical understanding of the subject matter in the
mind of the student.
Special emphasis has been given on the narrative style, illustrations, activity exercises,
clarity of expression, coverage of topics within the available time in school. A large number of
extremely talented and dedicated people including practising teachers helped in bringing out
this beautiful book. Our main purpose was to make sure that school level biology is not a
burden for students and teachers. We sincerely wish that teaching biology and learning biology
would become an enjoyable activity.
PROFESSOR K. Muralidhar
Department of Zoology
University of Delhi
(x)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : about and contents - Page 11 :
 CONTENTS
FOREWORD
iii
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOK
V
A NOTE FOR THE TEACHERS AND STUDENTS
ix
UNIT I
DIVERSITY IN THE LIVING WORLD
1-54
Chapter 1 : The Living World
3
Chapter 2 : Biological Classification
10
Chapter 3 : Plant Kingdom
23
Chapter 4 : Animal Kingdom
37
UNIT II
STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN PLANTS AND ANIMALS
55-84
Chapter 5 : Morphology of Flowering Plants
57
Chapter 6 : Anatomy of Flowering Plants
71
Chapter 7 : Structural Organisation in Animals
79
UNIT III
CELL : STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS
85-130
Chapter 8
: Cell : The Unit of Life
87
Chapter 9
: Biomolecules
104
Chapter 10 : Cell Cycle and Cell Division
120
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : about and contents - Page 12 :
 UNIT IV
PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
131-180
Chapter 11 : Photosynthesis in Higher Plants
133
Chapter 12 : Respiration in Plants
153
Chapter 13 : Plant Growth and Development
166
UNIT V
HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY
181-250
Chapter 14 : Breathing and Exchange of Gases
183
Chapter 15 : Body Fluids and Circulation
193
Chapter 16 : Excretory Products and their Elimination
205
Chapter 17 : Locomotion and Movement
217
Chapter 18 : Neural Control and Coordination
230
Chapter 19 : Chemical Coordination and Integration
239
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 1 :
 Biology is the science of life forms and living processes. The living world
comprises an amazing diversity of living organisms. Early man could
easily perceive the difference between inanimate matter and living
organisms. Early man deified some of the inanimate matter (wind, sea,
fire etc.) and some among the animals and plants. A common feature of
all such forms of inanimate and animate objects was the sense of awe
or fear that they evoked. The description of living organisms including
human beings began much later in human history. Societies which
indulged in anthropocentric view of biology could register limited
progress in biological knowledge. Systematic and monumental
description of life forms brought in, out of necessity, detailed systems
of identification, nomenclature and classification. The biggest spin off
of such studies was the recognition of the sharing of similarities among
living organisms both horizontally and vertically. That all present day
living organisms are related to each other and also to all organisms
that ever lived on this earth, was a revelation which humbled man and
led to cultural movements for conservation of biodiversity. In the
following chapters of this unit, you will get a description, including
classification, of animals and plants from a taxonomist’s perspective.
DIVERSITY IN THE LIVING WORLD
Chapter 1
The Living World
Chapter 2
Biological Classification
Chapter 3
Plant Kingdom
Chapter 4
Animal Kingdom
UNIT 1
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 2 :
 Born on 5 July 1904, in Kempten, Germany, ERNST MAYR, the
Harvard University evolutionary biologist who has been called
‘The Darwin of the 20th century’, was one of the 100 greatest
scientists of all time. Mayr joined Harvard’s Faculty of Arts
and Sciences in 1953 and retired in 1975, assuming the title
Alexander Agassiz Professor of Zoology Emeritus. Throughout
his nearly 80-year career, his research spanned ornithology,
taxonomy, zoogeography, evolution, systematics, and the
history and philosophy of biology. He almost single-handedly
made the origin of species diversity the central question of
evolutionary biology that it is today. He also pioneered the
currently accepted definition of a biological species. Mayr was
awarded the three prizes widely regarded as the triple crown of
biology: the Balzan Prize in 1983, the International Prize for
Biology in 1994, and the Crafoord Prize in 1999. Mayr died at
the age of 100 in the year 2004.
Ernst Mayr
(1904 – 2004)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 3 :
 How wonderful is the living world ! The wide range of living types is
amazing. The extraordinary habitats in which we find living organisms,
be it cold mountains, deciduous forests, oceans, fresh water lakes, deserts
or hot springs, leave us speechless. The beauty of a galloping horse, of
the migrating birds, the valley of flowers or the attacking shark evokes
awe and a deep sense of wonder. The ecological conflict and cooperation
among members of a population and among populations of a community
or even the molecular traffic inside a cell make us deeply reflect on – what
indeed is life? This question has two implicit questions within it. The first
is a technical one and seeks answer to what living is as opposed to the
non-living, and the second is a philosophical one, and seeks answer to
what the purpose of life is. As scientists, we shall not attempt answering
the second question. We will try to reflect on – what is living?
1.1
DIVERSITY IN THE LIVING WORLD
If you look around you will see a large variety of living organisms, be it
potted plants, insects, birds, your pets or other animals and plants. There
are also several organisms that you cannot see with your naked eye but
they are all around you. If you were to increase the area that you make
observations in, the range and variety of organisms that you see would
increase. Obviously, if you were to visit a dense forest, you would probably
see a much greater number and kinds of living organisms in it. Each
different kind of plant, animal or organism that you see, represents a
species. The number of species that are known and described range
between 1.7-1.8 million. This refers to biodiversity or the number and
THE LIVING WORLD
CHAPTER  1
1.1 Diversity in the
Living World
1.2 Taxonomic
Categories
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 4 :
 4
BIOLOGY
types of organisms present on earth. We should remember here that as
we explore new areas, and even old ones, new organisms are continuously
being identified.
As stated earlier, there are millions of plants and animals in the world;
we know the plants and animals in our own area by their local names.
These local names would vary from place to place, even within a country.
Probably you would recognise the confusion that would be created if we
did not find ways and means to talk to each other, to refer to organisms
we are talking about.
Hence, there is a need to standardise the naming of living organisms
such that a particular organism is known by the same name all over the
world. This process is called nomenclature. Obviously, nomenclature
or naming is only possible when the organism is described correctly and
we know to what organism the name is attached to. This is identification.
In order to facilitate the study, number of scientists have established
procedures to assign a scientific name to each known organism.  This is
acceptable to biologists all over the world. For plants, scientific names are
based on agreed principles and criteria, which are provided in International
Code for Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN). You may ask, how  are animals
named? Animal taxonomists have evolved International Code of Zoological
Nomenclature (ICZN). The scientific names ensure that each organism
has only one name. Description of any organism should enable the people
(in any part of the world) to arrive at the same name. They also ensure
that such a name has not been used for any other known organism.
Biologists follow universally accepted principles to provide scientific
names to known organisms.  Each name has two components – the
Generic name and the specific epithet. This system of providing a
name with two components is called Binomial nomenclature. This
naming system given by Carolus Linnaeus is being practised by biologists
all over the world. This naming system using a two word format was
found convenient. Let us take the example of mango to understand the
way of providing scientific names better. The scientific name of mango is
written as Mangifera indica. Let us see how it is a binomial name.  In this
name Mangifera represents the genus while indica, is a particular species,
or a specific epithet. Other universal rules of nomenclature are as follows:
1.
Biological names are generally in Latin and written in italics.
They are Latinised or derived from Latin irrespective of their
origin.
2.
The first word in a biological name represents the genus while
the second component denotes the specific epithet.
3.
Both the words in a biological name, when handwritten, are
separately underlined, or printed in italics to indicate their Latin
origin.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 5 :
 THE LIVING WORLD
5
4.
The first word denoting the genus starts with a capital letter
while the specific epithet starts with a small letter. It can be
illustrated with the example of Mangifera indica.
Name of the author appears after the specific epithet, i.e., at the end of
the biological name and is written in an abbreviated form, e.g., Mangifera
indica Linn. It indicates that this species was first described by Linnaeus.
Since it is nearly impossible to study all the living organisms, it is
necessary to devise some means to make this possible. This process is
classification. Classification is the process by which anything is grouped
into convenient categories based on some easily observable characters.
For example, we easily recognise groups such as plants or animals or
dogs, cats or insects. The moment we use any of these terms, we associate
certain characters with the organism in that group. What image do you
see when you think of a dog ? Obviously, each one of us will see ‘dogs’
and not ‘cats’. Now, if we were to think of ‘Alsatians’ we know what we are
talking about. Similarly, suppose we were to say ‘mammals’, you would,
of course, think of animals with external ears and body hair. Likewise, in
plants, if we try to talk of ‘Wheat’, the picture in each of our minds will be
of wheat plants, not of rice or any other plant. Hence, all these - ‘Dogs’,
‘Cats’, ‘Mammals’, ‘Wheat’, ‘Rice’, ‘Plants’, ‘Animals’, etc., are convenient
categories we use to study organisms. The scientific term for these
categories is taxa. Here you must recognise that taxa can indicate
categories at very different levels. ‘Plants’ – also form a taxa. ‘Wheat’ is
also a taxa. Similarly, ‘animals’, ‘mammals’, ‘dogs’ are all taxa – but you
know that a dog is a mammal and mammals are animals. Therefore,
‘animals’, ‘mammals’ and ‘dogs’ represent taxa at different levels.
Hence, based on characteristics, all living organisms can be classified
into different taxa. This process of classification is taxonomy. External
and internal structure, along with the structure of cell, development
process and ecological information of organisms are essential and form
the basis of modern taxonomic studies.
Hence, characterisation, identification, classification and nomenclature
are the processes that are basic to taxonomy.
Taxonomy is not something new. Human beings have always been
interested in knowing more and more about the various kinds of
organisms, particularly with reference to their own use. In early days,
human beings needed to find sources for their basic needs of food, clothing
and shelter. Hence, the earliest classifications were based on the ‘uses’ of
various organisms.
Human beings were, since long, not only interested in knowing more
about different kinds of organisms and their diversities, but also the
relationships among them. This branch of study was referred to as
systematics. The word systematics is derived from the Latin word
‘systema’ which means systematic arrangement of organisms.  Linnaeus
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 6 :
 6
BIOLOGY
used Systema Naturae as the  title of his publication.  The scope of
systematics was later enlarged to include identification, nomenclature
and classification. Systematics takes into account evolutionary
relationships between organisms.
1.2
TAXONOMIC CATEGORIES
Classification is not a single step process but involves hierarchy of steps
in which each step represents a rank or category.  Since the category is a
part of overall taxonomic arrangement, it is called the taxonomic category
and all categories together constitute the taxonomic hierarchy.  Each
category, referred to as a unit of classification, in fact, represents a rank
and is commonly termed as taxon (pl.: taxa).
Taxonomic categories and hierarchy can be illustrated by an example.
Insects represent a group of organisms sharing common features like
three pairs of jointed legs.  It means insects are recognisable concrete
objects which can be classified, and thus were given a rank or category.
Can you name other such groups of organisms? Remember, groups
represent category.  Category further denotes rank.  Each rank or taxon,
in fact, represents a unit of classification. These taxonomic groups/
categories are distinct biological entities and not merely morphological
aggregates.
Taxonomical studies of all known organisms have led to the
development of common categories such as kingdom, phylum or division
(for plants), class, order, family, genus and species. All organisms,
including those in the plant and animal kingdoms have species as the
lowest category. Now the question you may ask is, how to place an
organism in various categories? The basic requirement is the knowledge
of characters of an individual or group of organisms.  This helps in
identifying similarities and dissimilarities among the individuals of the
same kind of organisms as well as of other kinds of organisms.
1.2.1
Species
Taxonomic studies consider a group of individual organisms with
fundamental similarities as a species.  One should be able to distinguish
one species from the other closely related species based on the distinct
morphological differences. Let us consider Mangifera indica, Solanum
tuberosum (potato) and Panthera leo (lion). All the three names, indica,
tuberosum and leo, represent the specific epithets,  while the first words
Mangifera, Solanum and Panthera are genera and represents another
higher level of taxon or category. Each genus may have one or more than
one specific epithets representing different organisms, but having
morphological similarities.  For example,  Panthera has another specific
epithet called tigris and Solanum includes species like nigrum and
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 7 :
 THE LIVING WORLD
7
melongena. Human beings belong to the species sapiens  which is grouped
in the genus Homo. The scientific name thus, for human being, is written
as Homo sapiens.
1.2.2
Genus
Genus comprises a group of related species which has more characters
in common in comparison to species of other genera. We can say that
genera are aggregates of closely related species. For example, potato and
brinjal are two different species but both belong to the genus Solanum.
Lion (Panthera leo), leopard (P. pardus) and tiger (P. tigris) with several
common features, are all species of the genus Panthera. This genus differs
from another genus Felis which includes cats.
1.2.3
Family
The next category, Family, has a group of related genera with still less
number of similarities as compared to genus and species.   Families are
characterised on the basis of both vegetative and reproductive features of
plant species. Among plants for example, three different genera Solanum,
Petunia and Datura are placed in the family Solanaceae. Among animals
for example, genus Panthera, comprising lion, tiger, leopard is put along
with genus, Felis (cats) in the family Felidae. Similarly, if you observe the
features of a cat and a dog, you will find some similarities and  some
differences as well. They are separated into two different families – Felidae
and Canidae, respectively.
1.2.4
Order
You have seen earlier that categories like species, genus and families are
based on a number of similar characters.   Generally, order and other
higher taxonomic categories are identified based on the aggregates of
characters.  Order being a higher category, is the assemblage of families
which exhibit a few similar characters.  The similar characters are less in
number as compared to different genera included in a family.  Plant
families like Convolvulaceae, Solanaceae are included in the order
Polymoniales mainly based on the floral characters. The animal order,
Carnivora, includes families like Felidae and Canidae.
1.2.5
Class
This category includes related orders. For example, order Primata
comprising monkey, gorilla and gibbon is placed in class Mammalia along
with order Carnivora that includes animals like tiger, cat and dog. Class
Mammalia has other orders also.
1.2.6
Phylum
Classes comprising animals like fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds along
with mammals constitute the next higher category called Phylum. All
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 8 :
 8
BIOLOGY
these, based on the common features like presence of notochord
and dorsal hollow neural system, are included in phylum
Chordata.  In case of plants,  classes with a few similar characters
are assigned to a higher category called Division.
1.2.7 Kingdom
All animals belonging to various phyla are assigned to the
highest category called Kingdom Animalia in the classification
system of animals. The Kingdom Plantae, on the other hand, is
distinct, and comprises all plants from various divisions.
Henceforth, we will refer to these two groups as animal and
plant kingdoms.
The taxonomic categories from species to kingdom have been
shown in ascending order starting with species in Figure 1.1.
These are broad categories.  However, taxonomists have also
developed sub-categories in this hierarchy to facilitate more
sound and scientific placement of various taxa.
Look at the hierarchy in Figure 1.1. Can you recall the basis
of arrangement? Say, for example, as we go higher from species
to kingdom, the number of common characteristics goes on
decreasing. Lower the taxa, more are the characteristics that the
members within the taxon share. Higher the category, greater is
the difficulty of determining the relationship to other taxa at the
same level. Hence, the problem of classification becomes more
complex.
Table 1.1 indicates the taxonomic categories to which some
common organisms like housefly, man, mango and wheat belong.
Figure 1.1 Taxonomic
c a t e g o r i e s
s h o w i n g
hierarchial
arrangement
in ascending
order
Common
Biological
Genus
Family
Order
Class
Phylum/
Name
 Name
Division
Man
Homo sapiens Homo
Hominidae
Primata
Mammalia
Chordata
Housefly
Musca
Musca
Muscidae
Diptera
Insecta
Arthropoda
domestica
Mango
Mangifera
Mangifera
Anacardiaceae
Sapindales Dicotyledonae
Angiospermae
indica
Wheat
Triticum
Triticum
Poaceae
Poales
Monocotyledonae Angiospermae
aestivum
TABLE 1.1  Organisms with their Taxonomic Categories
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 9 :
 THE LIVING WORLD
9
SUMMARY
The living world is rich in variety. Millions of plants and animals have been
identified and described but a large number still remains unknown. The
very range of organisms in terms of size, colour, habitat, physiological and
morphological features make us seek the defining characteristics of living
organisms. In order to facilitate the study of kinds and diversity of organisms,
biologists have evolved certain rules and principles for identification,
nomenclature and classification of organisms. The branch of knowledge
dealing with these aspects is referred to as taxonomy. The taxonomic studies
of various species of plants and animals are useful in agriculture, forestry,
industry and in general for knowing our bio-resources and their diversity.
The basics of taxonomy like identification, naming and classification of
organisms are universally evolved under international codes. Based on the
resemblances and distinct differences, each organism is identified and
assigned a correct scientific/biological name comprising two words as per
the binomial system of nomenclature. An organism represents/occupies a
place or position in the system of classification. There are many categories/
ranks and are generally referred to as taxonomic categories or taxa. All the
categories constitute a taxonomic hierarchy.
EXERCISES
1.
Why are living organisms classified?
2.
Why are the classification systems changing every now and then?
3.
What different criteria would you choose to classify people that you
meet often?
4.
What do we learn from identification of individuals and populations?
5.
Given below is the scientific name of Mango.  Identify the correctly
written name.
Mangifera Indica
Mangifera indica
6.
Define a taxon. Give some examples of taxa at different hierarchical
levels.
7.
Can  you identify the correct sequence of taxonomical categories?
(a)
Species
Order
Phylum
Kingdom
(b)
Genus
Species
Order
Kingdom
(c)
Species
Genus
Order
Phylum
8.
Try to collect all the currently accepted meanings for the word ‘species’.
Discuss with your teacher the meaning of species in case of higher
plants and animals on one hand, and bacteria on the other hand.
9.
Define and understand the following terms:
(i) Phylum  (ii) Class  (iii) Family  (iv) Order  (v) Genus
10.
Illustrate the taxonomical hierarchy with suitable examples of a plant
and an animal.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 1 :
 10
BIOLOGY
Since the dawn of civilisation, there have been many attempts to classify
living organisms. It was done instinctively not using criteria that were
scientific but borne out of a need to use organisms for our own use – for
food, shelter and clothing.  Aristotle was the earliest to attempt a more
scientific basis for classification. He used simple morphological characters
to classify plants into trees, shrubs and herbs. He also divided animals
into two groups, those which had red blood and those that did not.
In Linnaeus' time a Two Kingdom system of classification with
Plantae  and Animalia kingdoms was developed that included all
plants and animals respectively. This system did not distinguish between
the eukaryotes and prokaryotes, unicellular and multicellular organisms
and photosynthetic (green algae) and non-photosynthetic (fungi)
organisms. Classification of organisms into plants and animals was easily
done and was easy to understand, but, a large number of organisms
did not fall into either category. Hence the two kingdom classification
used for a long time was found inadequate.  Besides, gross morphology
a need was also felt for including other characteristics like cell structure,
nature of wall, mode of nutrition, habitat, methods of reproduction,
evolutionary relationships, etc.  Classification systems for the living
organisms have hence, undergone several changes over the time.
Though plant and animal kingdoms have been a constant under all
different systems, the understanding of what groups/organisms be
included under these kingdoms have been changing; the number and
nature of other kingdoms have also been understood differently by
different scientists over the time.
BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION
CHAPTER  2
2.1 Kingdom Monera
2.2 Kingdom Protista
2.3 Kingdom Fungi
2.4 Kingdom Plantae
2.5 Kingdom
Animalia
2.6 Viruses, Viroids
and Lichens
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 2 :
 BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION
11
R.H. Whittaker (1969) proposed a Five Kingdom Classification. The
kingdoms defined by him were named Monera, Protista, Fungi, Plantae
and Animalia. The main criteria for classification used by him include cell
structure, body organisation, mode of nutrition, reproduction and
phylogenetic relationships. Table 2.1 gives a comparative account of different
characteristics of the five kingdoms.
The three-domain system has also been proposed that divides the Kingdom
Monera into two domains, leaving the remaining eukaryotic kingdoms in the
third domain and thereby a six kingdom classification. You will learn about
this system in detail at higher classes.
Let us look at this five kingdom classification to understand the issues
and considerations that influenced the classification system. Earlier
classification systems included bacteria, blue green algae, fungi, mosses,
ferns, gymnosperms and the angiosperms under ‘Plants’. The character
that unified this whole kingdom was that all the organisms included had a
cell wall in their cells.  This placed together groups which widely differed in
other characteristics. It brought together the prokaryotic bacteria and the
blue green algae ( cyanobacteria) with other groups which were eukaryotic.
It also grouped together the unicellular organisms and the multicellular
ones, say, for example, Chlamydomonas and Spirogyra were placed together
under algae. The classification did not differentiate between the heterotrophic
group – fungi, and the autotrophic green plants, though they also showed
a characteristic difference in their walls composition – the fungi had chitin
Five Kingdoms
Characters
Cell type
Cell wall
Nuclear
membrane
Body
organisation
Mode of
nutrition
Monera
Prokaryotic
Noncellulosic
(Polysaccharide
+ amino acid)
Absent
Cellular
Autotrophic
(chemosyn-
thetic and
photosynthetic)
and Hetero-
trophic (sapro-
phytic/para-
sitic)
Protista
Eukaryotic
Present in
some
Present
Cellular
Autotrophic
(Photosyn-
thetic) and
Hetero-
trophic
Fungi
Eukaryotic
Present
with chitin
Present
Multiceullar/
loose tissue
Heterotrophic
(Saprophytic/
Parasitic)
Plantae
Eukaryotic
Present
(cellulose)
Present
Tissue/
organ
Autotrophic
(Photosyn-
thetic)
Animalia
Eukaryotic
Absent
Present
Tissue/organ/
organ system
Heterotrophic
( H o l o z o i c /
S a p r o p h y t i c
etc.)
TABLE 2.1  Characteristics of the Five Kingdoms
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 3 :
 12
BIOLOGY
in their walls while the green plants had a cellulosic cell wall.  When such
characteristics were considered, the fungi were placed in a separate
kingdom – Kingdom Fungi. All prokaryotic organisms were grouped
together under Kingdom Monera and the unicellular eukaryotic organisms
were placed in Kingdom Protista. Kingdom Protista has brought together
Chlamydomonas, Chlorella (earlier placed in Algae within Plants and both
having cell walls) with Paramoecium and Amoeba (which were earlier placed
in the animal kingdom which lack cell wall). It has put together organisms
which, in earlier classifications, were placed in different kingdoms.  This
happened because the criteria for classification changed. This kind of
changes will take place in future too depending on the improvement in our
understanding of characteristics and evolutionary relationships. Over time,
an attempt has been made to evolve a classification system which reflects
not only the morphological, physiological and reproductive similarities,
but is also phylogenetic, i.e., is based on  evolutionary relationships.
In this chapter we will study characteristics of Kingdoms Monera,
Protista and Fungi of the Whittaker system of classification.  The Kingdoms
Plantae and Animalia, commonly referred to as plant and animal
kingdoms, respectively, will be dealt separately in chapters 3 and 4.
Spore
Flagellum
Cocci
Bacilli
Spirilla
Vibrio
Figure 2.1 Bacteria of different shapes
2.1
KINGDOM MONERA
Bacteria are the sole members of the Kingdom Monera. They are the most
abundant micro-organisms. Bacteria occur almost everywhere. Hundreds
of bacteria are present in a handful of soil. They also live in extreme habitats
such as hot springs, deserts, snow and deep oceans where very few other
life forms can survive. Many of them live in or on other organisms as
parasites.
Bacteria are grouped under four categories based on their shape: the
spherical Coccus (pl.: cocci), the rod-shaped Bacillus (pl.: bacilli), the
comma-shaped Vibrium (pl.: vibrio) and the spiral Spirillum (pl.: spirilla)
(Figure 2.1).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 4 :
 BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION
13
Though the bacterial structure is very simple, they are very complex
in behaviour. Compared to many other organisms, bacteria as a group
show the most extensive metabolic diversity. Some of the bacteria are
autotrophic, i.e., they synthesise their own food from inorganic substrates.
They may be photosynthetic autotrophic or chemosynthetic autotrophic.
The vast majority of bacteria are heterotrophs, i.e., they depend on other
organisms or on dead organic matter for food.
2.1.1
Archaebacteria
These bacteria are special since they live in some of the most harsh habitats
such as extreme salty areas (halophiles), hot springs (thermoacidophiles)
and marshy areas (methanogens). Archaebacteria differ from other bacteria
in having a different cell wall structure and this feature is responsible for
their survival in extreme conditions. Methanogens are present in the gut
of several ruminant animals such as cows and buffaloes and they are
responsible for the production of methane (biogas) from the dung of these
animals.
Figure 2.2 A filamentous blue-green
algae – Nostoc
2.1.2
Eubacteria
There are thousands of different eubacteria or ‘true
bacteria’. They are characterised by the presence of a
rigid cell wall, and if motile, a flagellum. The
cyanobacteria (also referred to as blue-green algae)
have chlorophyll a similar to green plants and are
photosynthetic autotrophs (Figure 2.2). The
cyanobacteria are unicellular, colonial or filamentous,
freshwater/marine or terrestrial algae. The colonies
are generally surrounded by gelatinous sheath. They
often form blooms in polluted water bodies. Some of
these organisms can fix atmospheric nitrogen in
specialised cells called heterocysts, e.g., Nostoc and
Anabaena. Chemosynthetic autotrophic bacteria
oxidise various inorganic substances such as
nitrates, nitrites and ammonia and use the released
energy for their ATP production. They play a great role
in recycling nutrients like nitrogen, phosphorous,
iron and sulphur.
Heterotrophic bacteria are most abundant in
nature. The majority are important decomposers.
Many of them have a significant impact on human
affairs. They are helpful in making curd from milk,
production  of antibiotics, fixing nitrogen in legume
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 5 :
 14
BIOLOGY
roots, etc. Some are pathogens causing damage
to human beings, crops, farm animals and pets.
Cholera, typhoid, tetanus, citrus canker are well
known diseases  caused by different bacteria.
Bacteria reproduce mainly by fission (Figure
2.3). Sometimes, under unfavourable conditions,
they produce spores. They also reproduce by a
sort of sexual reproduction by adopting a
primitive type of DNA transfer from one bacterium
to the other.
The Mycoplasma are organisms that
completely lack a cell wall. They are the smallest
living cells known and can survive without oxygen. Many mycoplasma
are pathogenic in animals and plants.
2.2
KINGDOM PROTISTA
All single-celled eukaryotes are placed under Protista, but the boundaries
of this kingdom are not well defined. What may be ‘a photosynthetic
protistan’ to one biologist may be ‘a plant’ to another. In this book we
include Chrysophytes, Dinoflagellates, Euglenoids, Slime moulds and
Protozoans under Protista. Members of Protista are primarily aquatic.
This kingdom forms a link with the others dealing with plants, animals
and fungi. Being eukaryotes, the protistan cell body contains a well defined
nucleus and other membrane-bound organelles. Some have flagella or
cilia. Protists reproduce asexually and sexually by a process involving
cell fusion and zygote formation.
2.2.1
Chrysophytes
This group includes diatoms and golden algae (desmids). They are found
in fresh water as well as in marine environments. They are microscopic
and float passively in water currents (plankton). Most of them are
photosynthetic. In diatoms the cell walls form two thin overlapping shells,
which fit together as in a soap box. The walls are embedded with silica
and thus the walls are indestructible. Thus, diatoms have left behind
large amount of cell wall deposits in their habitat; this accumulation over
billions of years is referred to as ‘diatomaceous earth’. Being gritty this
soil is used in polishing, filtration of oils and syrups. Diatoms are the
chief ‘producers’ in the oceans.
Figure 2.3 A dividing bacterium
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 6 :
 BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION
15
2.2.2
Dinoflagellates
These organisms are mostly marine and photosynthetic.
They appear yellow, green, brown, blue or red depending
on the main pigments present in their cells. The cell wall
has stiff cellulose plates on the outer surface. Most of
them have two flagella; one lies longitudinally and the
other transversely in a furrow between the wall plates.
Very often, red dinoflagellates (Example: Gonyaulax)
undergo such rapid multiplication that they make the
sea appear red (red tides). Toxins released by such large
numbers may even kill other marine animals such as
fishes.
2.2.3
Euglenoids
Majority of them are fresh water organisms found in
stagnant water. Instead of a cell wall, they have a protein
rich layer called pellicle which makes their body flexible.
They have two flagella, a short and a long one. Though
they are photosynthetic in the presence of sunlight, when
deprived of sunlight they behave like heterotrophs by
predating on other smaller organisms. Interestingly, the
pigments of euglenoids are identical to those present in
higher plants. Example: Euglena (Figure 2.4b).
2.2.4
Slime Moulds
Slime moulds are saprophytic protists. The body moves
along decaying twigs and leaves engulfing organic
material. Under suitable conditions, they form an
aggregation called plasmodium which may grow and
spread over several feet. During unfavourable conditions,
the plasmodium differentiates and forms fruiting bodies
bearing spores at their tips. The spores possess true walls.
They are extremely resistant and survive for many years,
even under adverse conditions. The spores are dispersed
by air currents.
2.2.5
Protozoans
All protozoans are heterotrophs and live as predators or
parasites. They are believed to be primitive relatives of
animals. There are four major groups of protozoans.
Amoeboid protozoans: These organisms live in fresh
water, sea water or moist soil. They move and capture
Figure 2.4 (a) Dinoflagellates
(b) Euglena
(c) Slime mould
(d) Paramoecium
(d)
(a)
(c)
(b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 7 :
 16
BIOLOGY
their prey by putting out pseudopodia (false feet) as in Amoeba. Marine
forms have silica shells on their surface. Some of them such as Entamoeba
are parasites.
Flagellated protozoans: The members of this group are either free-living
or parasitic. They have flagella. The parasitic forms cause diaseases such
as sleeping sickness. Example: Trypanosoma.
Ciliated protozoans: These are aquatic, actively moving organisms because
of the presence of thousands of cilia. They have a cavity (gullet) that opens
to the outside of the cell surface. The coordinated movement of rows of
cilia causes the water laden with food to be steered into the gullet. Example:
Paramoecium (Figure 2.4d).
Sporozoans: This includes diverse organisms that have an infectious
spore-like stage in their life cycle. The most notorious is Plasmodium
(malarial parasite) which causes malaria, a disease which has a staggering
effect on human population.
2.3
KINGDOM FUNGI
The fungi constitute a unique kingdom of heterotrophic organisms. They
show a great diversity in morphology and habitat. You  must have seen
fungi on a moist bread and rotten fruits. The common mushroom you eat
and toadstools are also fungi. White spots seen on mustard leaves are due
to a parasitic fungus. Some unicellular fungi, e.g., yeast are used to make
bread and beer. Other fungi cause diseases in plants and animals; wheat
rust-causing Puccinia is an important example. Some are the source of
antibiotics, e.g., Penicillium. Fungi are cosmopolitan and occur in air, water,
soil and on animals and plants.  They prefer to grow in warm and humid
places. Have you ever wondered why we keep food in the refrigerator ? Yes,
it is to prevent food from going bad due to bacterial or fungal infections.
With the exception of yeasts which are unicellular, fungi are
filamentous. Their bodies consist of long, slender thread-like structures
called hyphae. The network of hyphae is known as mycelium. Some hyphae
are continuous tubes filled with multinucleated cytoplasm – these are
called coenocytic hyphae. Others have septae or cross walls in their
hyphae. The cell walls of fungi are composed of chitin and polysaccharides.
Most fungi are heterotrophic and absorb soluble organic matter from
dead substrates and hence are  called saprophytes. Those that depend
on living plants and animals are called parasites. They can also live as
symbionts – in association with algae as lichens and with roots of higher
plants as mycorrhiza.
Reproduction in fungi can take place by vegetative means –
fragmentation, fission and budding. Asexual reproduction is by spores
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 8 :
 BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION
17
called conidia or sporangiospores or zoospores, and sexual reproduction
is by oospores, ascospores and basidiospores. The various spores are
produced in distinct structures called fruiting bodies. The sexual cycle
involves the following  three steps:
(i)
Fusion of protoplasms between two motile or non-motile gametes
called plasmogamy.
(ii)
Fusion of two nuclei called karyogamy.
(iii)
Meiosis in zygote resulting in haploid spores.
When a fungus reproduces sexually, two haploid
hyphae of compatible mating types come together and
fuse. In some fungi the fusion of two haploid cells
immediately results in diploid cells (2n). However, in other
fungi (ascomycetes and basidiomycetes), an intervening
dikaryotic stage (n + n, i.e., two nuclei per cell) occurs;
such a condition is called a dikaryon and the phase is
called dikaryophase of fungus. Later, the parental nuclei
fuse and the cells become diploid.  The fungi form fruiting
bodies in which reduction division occurs, leading to
formation of haploid spores.
The morphology of the mycelium, mode of spore
formation and fruiting bodies  form the basis for the
division of the kingdom  into various classes.
2.3.1
Phycomycetes
Members of phycomycetes are found in aquatic habitats
and on decaying wood in moist and damp places or as
obligate parasites on plants. The mycelium is aseptate
and coenocytic. Asexual reproduction takes place by
zoospores (motile) or by aplanospores (non-motile). These
spores are endogenously produced in sporangium. A
zygospore is formed by fusion of two gametes. These
gametes are similar in morphology (isogamous) or
dissimilar (anisogamous or oogamous). Some common
examples are Mucor (Figure 2.5a), Rhizopus (the bread
mould mentioned earlier) and Albugo (the parasitic fungi
on mustard).
2.3.2
Ascomycetes
Commonly known as sac-fungi, the ascomycetes  are mostly
multicellular, e.g., Penicillium, or rarely unicellular, e.g., yeast
(Saccharomyces). They are saprophytic, decomposers,
parasitic or coprophilous (growing on dung). Mycelium
Figure 2.5 Fungi: (a) Mucor
(b) Aspergillus (c) Agaricus
(c)
(a)
(b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 9 :
 18
BIOLOGY
is branched and septate. The asexual spores are conidia produced
exogenously on the special mycelium called conidiophores. Conidia on
germination produce mycelium. Sexual spores are called ascospores
which are produced endogenously in sac like asci (singular ascus). These
asci are arranged in different types of fruiting bodies called ascocarps.
Some examples are Aspergillus (Figure 2.5b), Claviceps and Neurospora.
Neurospora  is used extensively in biochemical and genetic work. Many
members like morels and truffles are edible and are considered  delicacies.
2.3.3
Basidiomycetes
Commonly known forms of basidiomycetes are mushrooms, bracket fungi
or puffballs. They grow in soil, on logs and tree stumps and in living
plant bodies as parasites, e.g., rusts and smuts. The mycelium is branched
and septate. The asexual spores are generally not found, but vegetative
reproduction by fragmentation is common. The sex organs are absent,
but plasmogamy is brought about by fusion of two vegetative or somatic
cells of different strains or genotypes. The resultant structure is dikaryotic
which ultimately gives rise to basidium. Karyogamy and meiosis take
place in the basidium producing four basidiospores. The basidiospores
are exogenously produced on the basidium (pl.: basidia). The basidia are
arranged in fruiting bodies called basidiocarps. Some common members
are Agaricus (mushroom) (Figure 2.5c), Ustilago (smut) and Puccinia (rust
fungus).
2.3.4
Deuteromycetes
Commonly known as imperfect fungi because only the asexual or
vegetative phases of these fungi are known.  When the sexual forms of
these fungi were discovered they were moved into classes they rightly
belong to.  It is also possible that the asexual and vegetative stage have
been given one name (and placed under deuteromycetes) and the sexual
stage another (and placed under another class).  Later when the linkages
were established, the fungi were correctly identified and moved out of
deuteromycetes. Once perfect (sexual) stages of members of
dueteromycetes were discovered they were often moved to ascomycetes
and basidiomycetes. The deuteromycetes reproduce only by asexual spores
known as conidia. The mycelium is septate and branched. Some members
are saprophytes or parasites while a large number of them are
decomposers of litter and help in mineral cycling. Some examples are
Alternaria, Colletotrichum and Trichoderma.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 10 :
 BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION
19
2.4
KINGDOM PLANTAE
Kingdom Plantae includes all eukaryotic chlorophyll-containing
organisms commonly called plants. A few members are partially
heterotrophic such as the insectivorous plants or parasites. Bladderwort
and Venus fly trap are examples of insectivorous plants and Cuscuta is a
parasite. The plant cells have an eukaryotic structure with prominent
chloroplasts and cell wall mainly made of cellulose. You will study the
eukaryotic cell structure in detail in Chapter 8. Plantae includes algae,
bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms.
Life cycle of plants has two distinct phases – the diploid sporophytic
and the haploid gametophytic – that alternate with each other. The lengths
of the haploid and diploid phases, and whether these phases are free–
living or dependent on others, vary among different groups in plants.
This phenomenon is called alternation of generation. You will study
further details of this kingdom in Chapter 3.
2.5
KINGDOM ANIMALIA
This kingdom is characterised by heterotrophic eukaryotic organisms
that are multicellular and their cells lack cell walls. They directly or
indirectly depend on plants for food. They digest their food in an internal
cavity and store food reserves as glycogen or fat. Their mode of nutrition
is holozoic – by ingestion of food. They follow a definite growth pattern
and grow into adults that have a definite shape and size. Higher forms
show elaborate sensory and neuromotor mechanism. Most of them are
capable of locomotion.
The sexual reproduction is by copulation of male and female followed
by embryological development. Salient features of various phyla are
described in Chapter 4.
2.6
VIRUSES, VIROIDS, PRIONS AND LICHENS
In the five kingdom classification of Whittaker there is no mention of lichens
and some acellular organisms like viruses, viroids and prions. These are
briefly introduced here.
All of us who have suffered the ill effects of common cold or ‘flu’ know
what effects viruses can have on us, even if we do not associate it with our
condition. Viruses did not find a place in classification since they are not
considered truly ‘living’, if we understand living as those organisms that
have a cell structure.  The viruses are non-cellular organisms that are
characterised by having an inert crystalline structure outside the living cell.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 11 :
 20
BIOLOGY
Once they infect a cell they take over the machinery of the host cell to replicate
themselves, killing the host. Would you call viruses living or non-living?
Virus means venom or poisonous fluid. Dmitri Ivanowsky (1892)
recognised certain microbes as causal organism of the mosaic disease of
tobacco (Figure 2.6a). These were found to be smaller than bacteria
because they passed through bacteria-proof filters. M.W. Beijerinek
(1898) demonstrated that the extract of the infected plants of  tobacco
could cause infection in healthy plants and named the new pathogen
“virus” and called the fluid as Contagium vivum fluidum (infectious living
fluid).  W.M. Stanley (1935) showed that viruses could be crystallised
and crystals consist largely of proteins. They are inert outside their specific
host cell. Viruses are obligate parasites.
In addition to proteins, viruses also contain genetic material, that could
be either RNA or DNA.  No virus contains both RNA and DNA.  A virus is
a nucleoprotein and the genetic material is infectious. In general, viruses
that infect plants have single stranded RNA and viruses that infect animals
have either single or double stranded RNA or double stranded DNA.
Bacterial viruses or bacteriophages (viruses that infect the bacteria) are
usually double stranded DNA viruses (Figure 2.6b). The protein coat
called capsid made of small subunits called capsomeres, protects the
nucleic acid. These capsomeres are arranged in helical or polyhedral
geometric forms. Viruses cause diseases like  mumps, small pox, herpes
and influenza. AIDS in humans is also caused by a virus. In plants, the
symptoms can be mosaic formation, leaf rolling and curling, yellowing
and vein clearing, dwarfing  and stunted growth.
RNA
Capsid
(a)
Sheath
Head
Tail fibres
Collar
(b)
Figure 2.6  (a) Tobacco Mosaic Virus (TMV)  (b) Bacteriophage
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 12 :
 BIOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION
21
SUMMARY
Biological classification of plants and animals was first proposed by Aristotle on the
basis of simple morphological characters. Linnaeus later classified all living organisms
into two kingdoms – Plantae and Animalia. Whittaker proposed an elaborate five
kingdom classification – Monera, Protista, Fungi, Plantae and Animalia. The main
criteria of the five kingdom classification were cell structure, body organisation,
mode of nutrition and reproduction, and phylogenetic relationships.
In the five kingdom classification, bacteria are included in Kingdom Monera.
Bacteria are cosmopolitan in distribution. These organisms show the most extensive
metabolic diversity. Bacteria may be autotrophic or heterotrophic in their mode of
nutrition. Kingdom Protista includes all single-celled eukaryotes such as
Chrysophytes, Dinoflagellates, Euglenoids, Slime-moulds and Protozoans. Protists
have defined nucleus and other membrane bound organelles. They reproduce
both asexually and sexually. Members of Kingdom Fungi show a great diversity
in structures and habitat. Most fungi are saprophytic in their mode of nutrition.
They show asexual and sexual reproduction. Phycomycetes, Ascomycetes,
Basidiomycetes and Deuteromycetes are the four classes under this kingdom.
The plantae includes all eukaryotic chlorophyll-containing organisms. Algae,
bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms and angiosperms are included in this
group. The life cycle of plants exhibit alternation of generations – gametophytic
and sporophytic generations. The heterotrophic eukaryotic, multicellular
organisms lacking a cell wall are included in the Kingdom Animalia. The mode of
nutrition of these organisms is holozoic. They reproduce mostly by the sexual
mode. Some acellular organisms like viruses and viroids as well as the lichens are
not included in the five kingdom system of classification.
Viroids : In 1971, T.O. Diener discovered a new infectious agent that
was smaller than viruses and caused potato spindle tuber disease. It was
found to be a free RNA; it lacked the protein coat that is found in viruses,
hence the name viroid. The RNA of the viroid was of low molecular weight.
Prions : In modern medicine certain infectious neurological diseases
were found to be transmitted by an agent consisting of abnormally folded
protein. The agent was similar in size to viruses. These agents were called
prions. The most notable diseases caused by prions are bovine spongiform
encephalopathy (BSE) commonly called   mad cow disease in cattle and
its analogous variant Cr–Jacob disease (CJD) in humans.
Lichens : Lichens are symbiotic associations i.e. mutually useful
associations, between algae and fungi. The algal component is known as
phycobiont and fungal component as mycobiont, which are autotrophic
and heterotrophic, respectively. Algae prepare food for fungi and fungi
provide shelter and absorb mineral nutrients and water for its partner.
So close is their association that if one saw a lichen in nature one would
never imagine that they had two different organisms within them.  Lichens
are very good pollution indicators – they do not grow in polluted areas.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 13 :
 22
BIOLOGY
EXERCISES
1.
Discuss how classification systems have undergone several changes over a
period of time?
2.
State two economically important uses of:
(a) heterotrophic bacteria
(b) archaebacteria
3.
What is the nature of cell-walls in diatoms?
4.
Find out what do the terms ‘algal bloom’ and ‘red-tides’ signify.
5.
How are viroids different from viruses?
6.
Describe briefly the four major groups of Protozoa.
7.
Plants are autotrophic. Can you think of some plants that are partially
heterotrophic?
8.
What do the terms phycobiont and mycobiont signify?
9.
Give a comparative account of the classes of Kingdom Fungi under the following:
 (i) mode of nutrition
(ii) mode of reproduction
10.
What are the characteristic features of Euglenoids?
11.
Give a brief account of viruses with respect to their structure and nature of
genetic material. Also name four common viral diseases.
12.
Organise a discussion in your class on the topic – Are viruses living or non-
living?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 1 :
 PLANT KINGDOM
23
In the previous chapter, we looked at the broad classification of living
organisms under the system proposed by Whittaker (1969) wherein he
suggested the Five Kingdom classification viz. Monera, Protista, Fungi,
Animalia and Plantae.  In this chapter, we will deal in detail with further
classification within Kingdom Plantae popularly known as the ‘plant
kingdom’.
We must stress here that our understanding of the plant kingdom
has changed over time. Fungi, and members of the Monera and Protista
having cell walls have now been excluded from Plantae though earlier
classifications placed them in the same kingdom.  So, the cyanobacteria
that are also referred to as blue green algae are not ‘algae’ any more.  In
this chapter, we will describe Algae, Bryophytes, Pteridophytes,
Gymnosperms and Angiosperms under Plantae .
Let us also look at classification within angiosperms to understand
some of the concerns  that influenced the classification systems. The
earliest systems of classification used only gross superficial morphological
characters such as habit, colour, number and shape of leaves, etc.  They
were based mainly on vegetative characters or on the androecium
structure (system given by Linnaeus). Such systems were artificial; they
separated the closely related species since they were based on a few
characteristics. Also, the artificial systems gave equal weightage to
vegetative and sexual characteristics; this is not acceptable since we know
that often the vegetative characters are more easily affected by
environment. As against this, natural classification systems developed,
which were based on natural affinities among the organisms and consider,
PLANT KINGDOM
CHAPTER  3
3.1 Algae
3.2 Bryophytes
3.3 Pteridophytes
3.4 Gymnosperms
3.5 Angiosperms
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 2 :
 24
BIOLOGY
not only the external features, but also internal features, like ultra-
structure, anatomy, embryology and phytochemistry. Such a
classification for flowering plants was given by George Bentham and
Joseph Dalton Hooker.
At present phylogenetic classification systems based on
evolutionary relationships between the various organisms are acceptable.
This assumes that organisms belonging to the same taxa have a common
ancestor.   We now use information from many other sources too to help
resolve difficulties in classification.  These become more important when
there is no supporting fossil evidence.  Numerical Taxonomy which is
now easily carried out using computers is based on all observable
characteristics. Number and codes are assigned to all the characters and
the data are then processed. In this way each character is given equal
importance and at the same time hundreds of characters can be
considered.  Cytotaxonomy that is based on cytological information like
chromosome number, structure, behaviour and chemotaxonomy that
uses the chemical constituents of the plant to resolve confusions, are also
used by taxonomists these days.
3.1
ALGAE
Algae are chlorophyll-bearing, simple, thalloid, autotrophic and largely
aquatic (both fresh water and marine) organisms. They occur in a
variety of other habitats: moist stones, soils and wood. Some of them
also occur in association with fungi (lichen) and animals (e.g., on sloth
bear).
The form and size of algae is highly variable, ranging from colonial
forms like Volvox and the filamentous forms like Ulothrix and Spirogyra
(Figure 3.1). A few of the marine forms such as kelps, form massive plant
bodies.
The algae reproduce by vegetative, asexual and sexual methods.
Vegetative reproduction is by fragmentation. Each fragment develops into
a thallus. Asexual reproduction is by the production of different types of
spores, the most common being the zoospores. They are flagellated
(motile) and on germination gives rise to new plants. Sexual reproduction
takes place through fusion of two gametes. These gametes can be
flagellated and similar in size (as in Ulothrix) or non-flagellated (non-motile)
but similar in size (as in Spirogyra). Such reproduction is called
isogamous. Fusion of two gametes dissimilar in size, as in species of
Eudorina is termed as anisogamous. Fusion between one large, non-
motile (static) female gamete and a smaller, motile male gamete is termed
oogamous, e.g., Volvox, Fucus.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 3 :
 PLANT KINGDOM
25
Figure 3.1  Algae :
(a) Green algae   (i) Volvox         (ii) Ulothrix
(b) Brown algae  (i) Laminaria   (ii) Fucus
      (iii) Dictyota
(c)  Red algae     (i)  Porphyra    (ii) Polysiphonia
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 4 :
 26
BIOLOGY
Algae are useful to man in a variety of ways. At least a half of the total
carbon dioxide fixation on earth is carried out by algae through
photosynthesis. Being photosynthetic they increase the level of dissolved
oxygen in their immediate environment. They are of paramount
importance as primary producers of energy-rich compounds which form
the basis of the food cycles of all aquatic animals. Many species of Porphyra,
Laminaria and Sargassum  are among the 70 species of marine algae
used as food. Certain marine brown and red algae produce large amounts
of hydrocolloids (water holding substances), e.g., algin (brown algae) and
carrageen (red algae) which are used commercially. Agar, one of the
commercial products obtained from Gelidium and Gracilaria are used to
grow microbes and in preparations of ice-creams and jellies. Chlorella a
unicellular alga rich in proteins is used as food supplement even by space
travellers. The algae are divided into three main classes: Chlorophyceae,
Phaeophyceae and Rhodophyceae.
3.1.1
Chlorophyceae
The members of chlorophyceae are commonly called green algae. The
plant body may be unicellular, colonial or filamentous. They are usually
grass green due to the dominance of pigments chlorophyll a and b. The
pigments are localised in definite chloroplasts. The chloroplasts may be
discoid, plate-like, reticulate, cup-shaped, spiral or ribbon-shaped in
different species. Most of the members have one or more storage bodies
called pyrenoids located in the chloroplasts. Pyrenoids contain protein
besides starch. Some algae may store food in the form of oil droplets.
Green algae usually have a rigid cell wall made of an inner layer of cellulose
and an outer layer of pectose.
Vegetative reproduction usually takes place by fragmentation or by
formation of different types of spores. Asexual reproduction is by
flagellated zoospores produced in zoosporangia. The sexual reproduction
shows considerable variation in the type and formation of sex cells and it
may be isogamous, anisogamous or oogamous. Some commonly found
green algae are: Chlamydomonas, Volvox, Ulothrix, Spirogyra and Chara
(Figure 3.1a).
3.1.2
Phaeophyceae
The members of phaeophyceae or brown algae are found primarily in
marine habitats. They show great variation in size and form. They range
from simple branched, filamentous forms (Ectocarpus) to profusely
branched forms as represented by kelps, which may reach a height of
100 metres. They possess chlorophyll a, c, carotenoids and xanthophylls.
They vary in colour from olive green to various shades of brown depending
upon the amount of the xanthophyll pigment, fucoxanthin present in
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 5 :
 PLANT KINGDOM
27
them. Food is stored as complex carbohydrates, which may be in the
form of laminarin or mannitol. The vegetative cells have a cellulosic wall
usually covered on the outside by a gelatinous coating of algin. The
protoplast contains, in addition to plastids, a centrally located vacuole
and nucleus. The plant body is usually attached to the substratum by a
holdfast, and has a stalk, the stipe and leaf like photosynthetic organ –
the frond. Vegetative reproduction takes place by fragmentation. Asexual
reproduction in most brown algae is by biflagellate zoospores that are
pear-shaped and have two unequal laterally attached flagella.
Sexual reproduction may be isogamous, anisogamous or oogamous.
Union of gametes may take place in water or within the oogonium
(oogamous species). The gametes are pyriform (pear-shaped) and bear
two laterally attached flagella. The common forms are Ectocarpus, Dictyota,
Laminaria, Sargassum and Fucus (Figure 3.1b).
3.1.3
Rhodophyceae
The members of rhodophyceae are commonly called red algae because of
the predominance of the red pigment, r-phycoerythrin in their body. Majority
of the red algae are marine with greater concentrations found in the warmer
areas. They occur in both well-lighted regions close to the surface of water
and also at great depths in oceans where relatively little light penetrates.
The red thalli of most of the red algae are  multicellular. Some of them
have complex body organisation. The food is stored as floridean starch
which is very similar to amylopectin and glycogen in structure.
The red algae usually reproduce vegetatively by fragmentation. They
reproduce asexually by non-motile spores and sexually by non-motile
TABLE 3.1 Divisions of Algae and their Main Characteristics
Classes
Common
Major
Stored
Cell Wall
Flagellar
Habitat
Name
Pigments
Food
Number and
Position of
Insertions
Chlorophyceae Green
Chlorophyll
Starch
Cellulose
2-8, equal,
Fresh water,
algae
a, b
apical
brackish water,
salt water
Phaeophyceae
Brown
Chlorophyll
Mannitol,
Cellulose
2, unequal,
Fresh water
algae
a, c,
laminarin
and algin
lateral
(rare) brackish
fucoxanthin
water, salt
water
Rhodophyceae
Red
Chlorophyll
Floridean
Cellulose,
Absent
Fresh water
algae
a, d,
starch
pectin and
(some),
phycoerythrin
poly
brackish
sulphate
water, salt
esters
water (most)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 6 :
 28
BIOLOGY
gametes. Sexual reproduction is oogamous and accompanied by complex
post fertilisation developments. The common members are: Polysiphonia,
Porphyra (Figure 3.1c), Gracilaria and Gelidium.
3.2
BRYOPHYTES
Bryophytes include the various mosses and liverworts that are found
commonly growing in moist shaded areas in the hills (Figure 3.2).
Archegoniophore
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Antheridiophore
Capsule
Antheridial
branch
Branches
Archegonial
branch
Seta
Sporophyte
Gametophyte
Leaves
Main axis
Rhizoids
Gemma cup
Rhizoids
Gemma cup
Rhizoids
Figure 3.2
Bryophytes: A liverwort – Marchantia (a) Female thallus  (b) Male thallus
Mosses –  (c) Funaria, gametophyte and sporophyte  (d) Sphagnum
gametophyte
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 7 :
 PLANT KINGDOM
29
Bryophytes are also called amphibians of the plant kingdom because
these plants can live in soil but are dependent on water for sexual
reproduction. They usually occur in damp, humid and shaded localities.
They play an important role in plant succession on bare rocks/soil.
The plant body of bryophytes is more differentiated than that of algae.
It is thallus-like and prostrate or erect, and attached to the substratum
by unicellular or multicellular rhizoids. They lack true roots, stem or
leaves. They may possess root-like, leaf-like or stem-like structures. The
main plant body of the bryophyte is haploid. It produces gametes, hence
is called a gametophyte. The sex organs in bryophytes are multicellular.
The male sex organ is called antheridium. They produce biflagellate
antherozoids. The female sex organ called archegonium is flask-shaped
and produces a single egg. The antherozoids are released into water where
they come in contact with archegonium. An antherozoid fuses with the
egg to produce the zygote. Zygotes do not undergo reduction division
immediately. They produce a multicellular body called a sporophyte.
The sporophyte is not free-living but attached to the photosynthetic
gametophyte and derives nourishment from it. Some cells of the
sporophyte undergo reduction division (meiosis) to produce haploid
spores.  These spores germinate to produce gametophyte.
Bryophytes in general are of little economic importance but some
mosses provide food for herbaceous mammals, birds and other animals.
Species of Sphagnum, a moss, provide peat that have long been used as
fuel,  and as packing material for trans-shipment of living material because
of their capacity to hold water. Mosses along with lichens are the first
organisms to colonise rocks and hence, are of great ecological importance.
They decompose rocks making the substrate suitable for the growth of
higher plants. Since mosses form dense mats on the soil, they reduce the
impact of falling rain and prevent soil erosion. The bryophytes are divided
into liverworts and mosses.
3.2.1
Liverworts
The liverworts grow usually in moist, shady habitats such as banks of
streams, marshy ground, damp soil, bark of trees and deep in the woods.
The plant body of a liverwort is thalloid, e.g., Marchantia. The thallus is
dorsiventral and closely appressed to the substrate. The leafy members
have tiny leaf-like appendages in two rows on the stem-like structures.
Asexual reproduction in liverworts takes place by fragmentation of
thalli, or by the formation of specialised structures called gemmae
(sing. gemma). Gemmae are green, multicellular, asexual buds, which
develop in small receptacles  called gemma cups located on the thalli.
The gemmae become detached from the parent body and germinate to
form new individuals. During sexual reproduction, male and female sex
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 8 :
 30
BIOLOGY
organs are produced either on the same or on different thalli. The
sporophyte is differentiated into a foot, seta and capsule. After meiosis,
spores are produced within the capsule. These spores germinate to form
free-living gametophytes.
3.2.2
Mosses
The predominant stage of the life cycle of a moss is the gametophyte which
consists of two stages. The first stage is the protonema stage, which
develops directly from a spore. It is a creeping, green, branched and
frequently filamentous stage. The second stage is the leafy stage, which
develops from the secondary protonema as a lateral bud. They consist of
upright, slender axes bearing spirally arranged leaves. They are attached
to the soil through multicellular and branched rhizoids. This stage bears
the sex organs.
Vegetative reproduction in mosses is by fragmentation and budding
in the secondary protonema. In sexual reproduction, the sex organs
antheridia and archegonia are produced at the apex of the leafy shoots.
After fertilisation, the zygote develops into a sporophyte, consisting of a
foot, seta and capsule. The sporophyte in mosses is more elaborate than
that in liverworts. The capsule contains spores. Spores are formed after
meiosis. The mosses have an elaborate mechanism of spore dispersal.
Common examples of mosses are Funaria, Polytrichum and Sphagnum
(Figure 3.2).
3.3
PTERIDOPHYTES
The Pteridophytes include horsetails and ferns. Pteridophytes are used
for medicinal purposes and as soil-binders. They are also frequently grown
as ornamentals. Evolutionarily, they are the first terrestrial plants to
possess vascular tissues – xylem and phloem. You shall study more about
these tissues in Chapter 6. The pteridophytes are found in cool, damp,
shady places though some may flourish well in sandy-soil conditions.
You may recall that in bryophytes the dominant phase in the life
cycle is the gametophytic plant body. However, in pteridophytes, the
main plant body is a sporophyte which is differentiated into true root,
stem and leaves (Figure 3.3). These organs possess well-differentiated
vascular tissues. The leaves in pteridophyta are small (microphylls) as
in Selaginella or large (macrophylls) as in ferns. The sporophytes bear
sporangia that are subtended by leaf-like appendages called
sporophylls. In some cases sporophylls may form distinct compact
structures called strobili or cones (Selaginella, Equisetum). The
sporangia produce spores by meiosis in spore mother cells. The spores
germinate to give rise to inconspicuous, small but multicellular,
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 9 :
 PLANT KINGDOM
31
Figure 3.3  Pteridophytes :  (a) Selaginella  (b) Equisetum  (c) Fern (d) Salvinia
Strobilus
Node
Internode
Branch
Rhizome
(b)
(c)
(d)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 10 :
 32
BIOLOGY
free-living, mostly photosynthetic thalloid gametophytes called
prothallus. These gametophytes require cool, damp, shady places to
grow. Because of this specific restricted requirement and the need for
water for fertilisation, the spread of living pteridophytes is limited and
restricted to narrow geographical regions. The gametophytes bear male
and female sex organs called antheridia and archegonia, respectively.
Water is required for transfer of antherozoids – the male gametes released
from the antheridia, to the mouth of archegonium. Fusion of male gamete
with the egg present in the archegonium result in the formation of zygote.
Zygote thereafter produces a multicellular well-differentiated sporophyte
which is the dominant phase of the pteridophytes. In majority of the
pteridophytes all the spores are of similar kinds; such plants are called
homosporous. Genera like Selaginella and Salvinia which produce
two kinds of spores, macro (large) and micro (small) spores, are known
as heterosporous. The megaspores and microspores germinate and give
rise to female and male gametophytes, respectively. The female
gametophytes in these plants are retained on the parent sporophytes
for variable periods. The development of the zygotes into young embryos
take place within the female gametophytes. This event is a precursor to
the seed habit considered an important step in evolution.
The pteridophytes are further classified into four classes: Psilopsida
(Psilotum); Lycopsida (Selaginella, Lycopodium), Sphenopsida (Equisetum)
and Pteropsida (Dryopteris, Pteris, Adiantum).
3.4
GYMNOSPERMS
The gymnosperms (gymnos : naked, sperma : seeds) are plants in which
the ovules are not enclosed by any ovary wall and remain exposed, both
before and after fertilisation. The seeds that develop post-fertilisation, are
not covered, i.e., are naked. Gymnosperms include medium-sized trees
or tall trees and shrubs (Figure 3.4). One of the gymnosperms, the giant
redwood tree Sequoia is one of the tallest tree species. The roots are
generally tap roots. Roots in some genera have fungal association in the
form of mycorrhiza (Pinus), while in some others (Cycas) small specialised
roots called coralloid roots are associated with N2- fixing cyanobacteria.
The stems are unbranched (Cycas) or branched (Pinus, Cedrus). The leaves
may be simple or compound. In Cycas the pinnate leaves persist for a few
years. The leaves in gymnosperms are well-adapted to withstand extremes
of temperature, humidity and wind. In conifers, the needle-like leaves
reduce the surface area. Their thick cuticle and sunken stomata also
help to reduce water loss.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 11 :
 PLANT KINGDOM
33
The gymnosperms are heterosporous; they produce
haploid microspores and megaspores. The two kinds of
spores are produced within sporangia that are borne
on sporophylls which are arranged spirally along an axis
to form lax or compact strobili or cones. The strobili
bearing microsporophylls and microsporangia are
called microsporangiate or male strobili. The
microspores develop into a male gametophytic
generation which is highly reduced and is confined to
only a limited number of cells. This reduced
gametophyte is called a pollen grain. The development
of pollen grains take place within the microsporangia.
The cones bearing megasporophylls with ovules or
megasporangia are called macrosporangiate or female
strobili. The male or female cones or strobili may be
borne on the same tree (Pinus). However, in cycas male
cones and megasporophylls are borne on different trees.
The megaspore mother cell is differentiated from one of
the cells of the nucellus. The nucellus is protected by
envelopes and the composite structure is called an
ovule. The ovules are borne on megasporophylls which
may be clustered to form the female cones. The
megaspore mother cell divides meiotically to form four
megaspores. One of the megaspores enclosed within the
megasporangium develops into a multicellular  female
gametophyte that bears two or more archegonia or
female sex organs. The multicellular female gametophyte
is also retained within megasporangium.
Unlike bryophytes and pteridophytes, in
gymnosperms the male and the female gametophytes
do not have an independent free-living existence. They
remain within the sporangia retained on the
sporophytes. The pollen grain is released from the
microsporangium. They are carried in air currents and
come in contact with the opening of the ovules borne
on megasporophylls. The pollen tube carrying the
male gametes grows towards archegonia in the ovules
and discharge their contents near the mouth of the
archegonia. Following fertilisation, zygote develops
into an embryo and the ovules into seeds. These seeds
are not covered.
(c)
Figure 3.4 Gymnosperms: (a) Cycas
(b) Pinus (c) Ginkgo
Dwarf Shoot
Long Shoot
Seeds
(b)
(a)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 12 :
 34
BIOLOGY
3.5
ANGIOSPERMS
Unlike the gymnosperms where the ovules are naked, in the angiosperms
or flowering plants, the pollen grains and ovules are developed in
specialised structures called flowers. In angiosperms, the seeds are
enclosed in fruits. The angiosperms are an exceptionally large group of
plants occurring in wide range of habitats. They range in size from the
smallest Wolffia to tall trees of Eucalyptus (over 100 metres). They provide
us with food, fodder,  fuel, medicines and several other commercially
important products. They are divided into two classes : the dicotyledons
and the monocotyledons (Figure 3.5).
SUMMARY
Plant kingdom includes algae, bryophytes, pteridophytes, gymnosperms
and angiosperms. Algae are chlorophyll-bearing simple, thalloid,
autotrophic and largely aquatic organisms. Depending on the type of
pigment possesed and the type of stored food, algae are classfied into
three classes, namely Chlorophyceae, Phaeophyceae and Rhodophyceae.
Algae usually reproduce vegetatively by fragmentation, asexually by
formation of different types of spores and sexually by formation of gametes
which may show isogamy, anisogamy or oogamy.
Bryophytes are plants which can live in soil but are dependent on
water for sexual reproduction. Their plant body is more differentiated
than that of algae. It is thallus-like and prostrate or erect and attached to
the substratum by rhizoids. They possess root-like, leaf-like and stem-
(b)
(a)
Figure 3.5 Angiosperms : (a) A dicotyledon (b) A monocotyledon
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 13 :
 PLANT KINGDOM
35
like structures. The bryophytes are divided into liverworts and mosses.
The plant body of liverworts is thalloid and dorsiventral whereas mosses
have upright, slender axes bearing spirally arranged leaves. The main
plant body of a bryophyte is gamete-producing and is called a
gametophyte. It bears the male sex organs called antheridia  and female
sex organs called archegonia. The male and female gametes produced
fuse to form zygote which produces a multicellular body called a
sporophyte. It produces haploid spores. The spores germinate to form
gametophytes.
In pteridophytes the main plant is a sporophyte which is differentiated
into true root, stem and leaves. These organs possess well-differentiated
vascular tissues. The sporophytes bear sporangia which produce spores.
The spores germinate to form  gametophytes which require cool, damp
places to grow. The gametophytes bear male and female sex organs called
antheridia and archegonia, respectively. Water is required for transfer of
male gametes to archegonium where zygote is formed after fertilisation.
The zygote produces a sporophyte.
The gymnosperms are the plants in which ovules are not enclosed by
any ovary wall. After fertilisation the seeds remain exposed and therefore
these plants are called naked-seeded plants. The gymnosperms produce
microspores and megaspores which are produced in microsporangia and
megasporangia borne on the sporophylls. The sporophylls –
microsporophylls and megasporophylls – are arranged spirally on axis
to form male and female cones, respectively. The pollen grain germinates
and pollen tube releases the male gamete into the ovule, where it fuses
with the egg cell in archegonia. Following fertilisation, the zygote develops
into embryo and the ovules into seeds.
The angiosperms are divided into two classes – the dicotyledons and
the monocotyledons.
EXERCISES
1.
What is the basis of classification of algae?
2.
When and where does reduction division take place in the life cycle of a
liverwort, a moss, a fern, a gymnosperm and an angiosperm?
3.
Name three groups of plants that bear archegonia. Briefly describe the
life cycle of any one of them.
4.
Mention the ploidy of the following: protonemal cell of a moss; primary
endosperm nucleus in dicot, leaf cell of a moss; prothallus cell of a ferm;
gemma cell in Marchantia; meristem cell of monocot, ovum of a liverwort,
and zygote of a fern.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 14 :
 36
BIOLOGY
5.
Write a note on economic importance of algae and gymnosperms.
6.
Both gymnosperms and angiosperms bear seeds, then why are they
classified separately?
7.
What is heterospory? Briefly comment on its significance. Give two
examples.
8.
Explain briefly the following terms with suitable examples:-
(i) protonema
(ii) antheridium
(iii) archegonium
(iv) diplontic
(v) sporophyll
(vi) isogamy
9.
Differentiate between the following:-
(i) red algae and brown algae
(ii) liverworts and moss
(iii) homosporous and heterosporous pteridophyte
10. Match the following (column I with column II)
Column I
Column II
(a) Chlamydomonas
(i) Moss
(b) Cycas
(ii) Pteridophyte
(c) Selaginella
(iii) Algae
(d)  Sphagnum
(iv) Gymnosperm
11. Describe the important characteristics of gymnosperms.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 1 :
 ANIMAL KINGDOM
37
37
When you look around, you will observe different animals with different
structures and forms.  As over a million species of animals have been
described till now, the need for classification becomes all the more
important. The classification also helps in assigning a systematic position
to newly described species.
4.1
BASIS OF CLASSIFICATION
Inspite of differences in structure and form of different animals, there are
fundamental features common to various individuals in relation to the
arrangement of cells, body symmetry, nature of coelom, patterns of
digestive, circulatory or reproductive systems. These features are used
as the basis of animal classification and some of them are discussed here.
4.1.1
Levels of Organisation
Though all members of Animalia are multicellular, all of them do not
exhibit the same pattern of organisation of cells. For example, in sponges,
the cells are arranged as loose cell aggregates, i.e., they exhibit cellular
level of organisation. Some division of labour (activities) occur among
the cells. In coelenterates, the arrangement of cells is more complex. Here
the cells performing the same function are arranged into tissues, hence is
called tissue level of organisation. A still higher level of organisation, i.e.,
organ level is exhibited by members of Platyhelminthes and other higher
phyla where tissues are grouped together to form organs, each specialised
for a particular function. In animals like Annelids, Arthropods, Molluscs,
ANIMAL KINGDOM
CHAPTER  4
4.1 Basis of
Classification
4.2 Classification of
Animals
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 2 :
 38
BIOLOGY
Echinoderms and Chordates, organs have
associated to form functional systems, each
system concerned with a specific physiological
function. This pattern is called organ system
level of organisation. Organ systems in different
groups of animals exhibit various patterns of
complexities. For example, the digestive system
in Platyhelminthes has only a single opening
to the outside of the body that serves as both
mouth and anus, and is hence called
incomplete. A complete digestive system has
two openings, mouth and anus. Similarly, the
circulatory system may be of two types:
(i) open type in which the blood is pumped
out of the heart and the cells and tissues are
directly bathed in it and
(ii) closed type in which the blood is circulated
through a series of vessels of varying diameters
(arteries, veins and capillaries).
4.1.2
Symmetry
Animals can be categorised on the basis of their
symmetry. Sponges are mostly  asymmetrical,
i.e., any plane that passes through the centre
does not divide them into equal halves. When
any plane passing through the central axis of
the body divides the organism into two identical
halves, it is called radial symmetry.
Coelenterates, ctenophores and echinoderms
have this kind of body plan (Figure 4.1a).
Animals like annelids, arthropods, etc., where
the body can be divided into identical left and
right halves in only one plane, exhibit bilateral
symmetry (Figure 4.1b).
4.1.3
Diploblastic and Triploblastic
Organisation
Animals in which the cells are arranged in two
embryonic layers, an external ectoderm and
an internal endoderm, are called diploblastic
animals, e.g., coelenterates. An undifferentiated
layer, mesoglea, is present in between the
ectoderm and the endoderm (Figure 4.2a).
Figure 4.2
Showing germinal layers :
(a) Diploblastic (b) Triploblastic
(a)
(b)
Ectoderm
Mesoglea
Endoderm
Mesoderm
Figure 4.1 (b) Bilateral symmetry
Figure 4.1 (a)  Radial symmetry
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 3 :
 ANIMAL KINGDOM
39
39
4.1.4
Coelom
Presence or absence of a cavity between the body
wall and the gut wall is very important in
classification. The body cavity, which is lined
by mesoderm is called coelom. Animals
possessing coelom are called coelomates, e.g.,
annelids, molluscs, arthropods, echinoderms,
hemichordates and chordates (Figure 4.3a). In
some animals, the body cavity is not lined by
mesoderm, instead, the mesoderm is present as
scattered pouches in between the ectoderm and
endoderm. Such a body cavity is called
pseudocoelom and the animals possessing them
are 
called pseudocoelomates, 
e.g.,
aschelminthes (Figure 4.3b). The animals in
which the body cavity is absent are called
acoelomates, e.g., platyhelminthes (Figure 4.3c).
Figure 4.3 Diagrammatic sectional view of :
(a) Coelomate (b) Pseudocoelomate
(c) Acoelomate
Those animals in which the developing embryo has a third germinal layer,
mesoderm, in between the ectoderm and endoderm, are called
triploblastic animals (platyhelminthes to chordates, Figure 4.2b).
4.1.5
Segmentation
In some animals, the body is externally and internally divided into
segments with a serial repetition of at least some organs. For example, in
earthworm, the body shows this pattern called metameric segmentation
and the phenomenon is known as metamerism.
4.1.6
Notochord
Notochord is a mesodermally derived rod-like structure formed on the
dorsal side during embryonic development in some animals. Animals with
notochord are called chordates and those animals which do not form this
structure are called non-chordates, e.g., porifera to echinoderms.
4.2
CLASSIFICATION OF ANIMALS
The broad classification of Animalia based on common fundamental
features as mentioned in the preceding sections is given in Figure  4.4.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 4 :
 40
BIOLOGY
The important characteristic features of the
different phyla are described.
4.2.1 Phylum – Porifera
Members of this phylum are commonly known
as sponges. They are generally marine and mostly
asymmetrical animals (Figure 4.5). These are
primitive multicellular animals and have cellular
level of organisation. Sponges have a water
transport or canal system. Water enters through
minute pores (ostia) in the body wall into a central
cavity, spongocoel, from where it goes out
through the osculum. This pathway of water
transport is helpful in food gathering, respiratory
exchange and removal of waste. Choanocytes
or collar cells line the spongocoel and the canals.
Digestion is intracellular. The body is supported
by a skeleton made up of spicules or spongin
fibres. Sexes are not separate (hermaphrodite),
i.e., eggs and sperms are produced by the same
individual. Sponges reproduce asexually by
fragmentation and sexually by formation of
gametes. Fertilisation is internal and development
is indirect having a larval stage which is
morphologically distinct from the adult.
*Echinodermata exhibits radial or bilateral symmetry depending on the stage.
Figure 4.4  Broad classification of Kingdom Animalia based on common fundamental features
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4.5
Examples of Porifera : (a) Sycon
(b) Euspongia  (c) Spongilla
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 5 :
 ANIMAL KINGDOM
41
41
cnidoblasts or cnidocytes (which contain the stinging capsules or
nematocysts) present on the tentacles and the body. Cnidoblasts are used
for anchorage, defense and for the capture of prey (Figure 4.7). Cnidarians
exhibit tissue level of organisation and are diploblastic. They have a central
gastro-vascular cavity with a single opening, mouth on hypostome.
Digestion is extracellular and intracellular. Some of the cnidarians, e.g.,
corals have a skeleton composed of calcium carbonate. Cnidarians exhibit
two basic body forms called polyp and medusa (Figure 4.6). The former
is a sessile and cylindrical form like Hydra, Adamsia, etc. whereas, the
latter is umbrella-shaped and free-swimming like Aurelia or jelly fish.
Those cnidarians which exist in both forms exhibit alternation of
generation (Metagenesis), i.e., polyps produce medusae asexually and
medusae form the polyps sexually (e.g., Obelia).
Examples: Physalia (Portuguese man-of-war), Adamsia (Sea anemone),
Pennatula (Sea-pen), Gorgonia (Sea-fan) and Meandrina (Brain coral).
Figure 4.7
Diagrammatic view of
Cnidoblast
Figure 4.6
Examples of  Coelenterata indicating outline of their body form :
(a) Aurelia (Medusa) (b) Adamsia (Polyp)
(b)
(a)
Examples: Sycon (Scypha), Spongilla (Fresh water sponge) and Euspongia
(Bath sponge).
4.2.2
Phylum – Coelenterata (Cnidaria)
They are aquatic, mostly marine, sessile or free-swimming, radially
symmetrical animals (Figure 4.6). The name cnidaria is derived from the
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 6 :
 42
BIOLOGY
4.2.3
Phylum – Ctenophora
Ctenophores, commonly known as sea walnuts or comb
jellies are exclusively marine, radially symmetrical, diploblastic
organisms with tissue level of organisation. The body bears
eight external rows of ciliated comb plates, which help in
locomotion (Figure 4.8). Digestion is both extracellular and
intracellular. Bioluminescence (the property of a living
organism to emit light) is well-marked in ctenophores. Sexes
are not separate. Reproduction takes place only by sexual
means. Fertilisation is external with indirect development.
Examples: Pleurobrachia and Ctenoplana.
4.2.4
Phylum – Platyhelminthes
They have dorso-ventrally flattened body, hence are called
flatworms (Figure 4.9). These are mostly endoparasites found
in animals including human beings. Flatworms are bilaterally
symmetrical, triploblastic and acoelomate animals with organ
level of organisation. Hooks and suckers are present in the
parasitic forms. Some of them absorb nutrients from the host
directly through their body surface. Specialised cells called
flame cells help in osmoregulation and excretion. Sexes are not
separate. Fertilisation is internal and development is through
many larval stages. Some members like Planaria possess high
regeneration capacity.
Examples: Taenia (Tapeworm), Fasciola (Liver fluke).
Figure 4.8 Example of
Ctenophora
(Pleurobrachia)
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.9 Examples of Platyhelminthes : (a) Tape worm (b) Liver fluke
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 7 :
 ANIMAL KINGDOM
43
43
4.2.5
Phylum – Aschelminthes
The body of the aschelminthes is circular in
cross-section, hence, the name roundworms
(Figure 4.10). They may be freeliving, aquatic
and terrestrial or parasitic in plants and animals.
Roundworms have organ-system level of body
organisation. They are bilaterally symmetrical,
triploblastic and pseudocoelomate animals.
Alimentary canal is complete with a well-
developed muscular pharynx. An excretory
tube removes body wastes from the body cavity
through the excretory pore. Sexes are separate
(dioecious), i.e., males and females are distinct.
Often females are longer than males. Fertilisation
is internal and development may be direct (the
young ones resemble the adult) or indirect.
Examples : Ascaris (Roundworm), Wuchereria
(Filaria worm), Ancylostoma (Hookworm).
4.2.6
Phylum – Annelida
They may be aquatic (marine and fresh water) or
terrestrial; free-living, and sometimes parasitic.
They exhibit organ-system level of body
organisation and bilateral symmetry. They are
triploblastic, metamerically segmented and
coelomate animals. Their body surface is
distinctly marked out into segments or
metameres and, hence, the phylum name
Annelida (Latin, annulus : little ring) (Figure 4.11).
They possess longitudinal and circular muscles
which help in locomotion. Aquatic annelids like
Nereis possess lateral appendages, parapodia,
which help in swimming. A closed circulatory
system is present. Nephridia (sing. nephridium)
help in osmoregulation and excretion. Neural
system consists of paired ganglia (sing. ganglion)
connected by lateral nerves to a double ventral
nerve cord. Nereis, an aquatic form, is dioecious,
but earthworms and leeches are monoecious.
Reproduction is sexual.
Examples : Nereis, Pheretima (Earthworm) and
Hirudinaria (Blood sucking leech).
Figure 4.11 Examples of Annelida : (a) Nereis
(b) Hirudinaria
Male
Female
Figure 4.10 Example of
Aschelminthes:
Roundworm
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 8 :
 44
BIOLOGY
4.2.7
Phylum – Arthropoda
This is the largest phylum of Animalia which
includes insects. Over two-thirds of all named
species on earth are arthropods (Figure 4.12).
They have organ-system level of organisation.
They are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic,
segmented and coelomate animals. The body
of arthropods is covered by chitinous
exoskeleton. The body consists of head, thorax
and abdomen. They have jointed appendages
(arthros-joint, poda-appendages). Respiratory
organs are gills, book gills, book lungs or
tracheal system. Circulatory system is of open
type. Sensory organs like antennae, eyes
(compound and simple), statocysts or
balancing organs are present.  Excretion takes
place through malpighian tubules. They are
mostly dioecious. Fertilisation is usually
internal. They are mostly oviparous.
Development may be direct or indirect.
Examples: Economically important insects –
Apis (Honey bee), Bombyx (Silkworm), Laccifer
(Lac insect)
Vectors – Anopheles, Culex and Aedes
(Mosquitoes)
Gregarious pest – Locusta (Locust)
Living fossil – Limulus (King crab).
4.2.8
Phylum – Mollusca
This is the second largest animal phylum
(Figure 4.13). Molluscs are terrestrial or aquatic
(marine or fresh water) having an organ-system
level of organisation. They are bilaterally
symmetrical, triploblastic and coelomate
animals. Body is covered by a calcareous shell
and is unsegmented with a distinct head,
muscular foot and visceral hump. A soft and
spongy layer of skin forms a mantle over the
visceral hump. The space between the hump
and the mantle is called the mantle cavity in
which feather like gills are present. They have
respiratory and excretory functions. The
anterior head region has sensory tentacles. The
mouth contains a file-like rasping organ for
feeding, called radula.
Figure 4.12 Examples of Arthropoda :
(a) Locust (b) Butterfly
(c) Scorpion (d) Prawn
 (a)
 (c)
 (b)
 (d)
Figure 4.13 Examples of Mollusca :
(a) Pila  (b) Octopus
(b)
(a)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 9 :
 ANIMAL KINGDOM
45
45
They are usually dioecious and oviparous with indirect
development.
Examples: Pila (Apple snail), Pinctada (Pearl oyster), Sepia
(Cuttlefish), Loligo (Squid), Octopus (Devil fish), Aplysia (Sea-
hare), Dentalium (Tusk shell) and Chaetopleura (Chiton).
4.2.9
Phylum – Echinodermata
These animals have an endoskeleton of calcareous ossicles
and, hence, the name Echinodermata (Spiny bodied, Figure
4.14). All are marine with organ-system level of organisation.
The adult echinoderms are radially symmetrical but larvae
are bilaterally symmetrical. They are triploblastic and
coelomate animals. Digestive system is complete with mouth
on the lower (ventral) side and anus on the upper (dorsal)
side. The most distinctive feature of echinoderms is the
presence of water vascular system which helps in
locomotion, capture and transport of food and respiration.
An excretory system is absent. Sexes are separate.
Reproduction is sexual. Fertilisation is usually external.
Development is indirect with free-swimming larva.
Examples: Asterias (Star fish), Echinus (Sea urchin), Antedon
(Sea lily), Cucumaria (Sea cucumber) and Ophiura (Brittle star).
4.2.10
Phylum – Hemichordata
Hemichordata was earlier considered as a sub-phylum under
phylum Chordata. But now it is placed as a separate phylum
under non-chordata. Hemichordates have a rudimentary
structure in the collar region called stomochord, a structure
similar to notochord.
This phylum consists of a small group of worm-like
marine animals with organ-system level of organisation. They
are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic and coelomate
animals. The body is cylindrical and is composed of an
anterior proboscis, a collar and a long trunk (Figure 4.15).
Circulatory system is of  open type. Respiration takes place
through gills. Excretory organ is proboscis gland. Sexes are
separate. Fertilisation is external. Development is indirect.
Examples: Balanoglossus and Saccoglossus.
4.2.11
Phylum – Chordata
Animals belonging to phylum Chordata are fundamentally
characterised by the presence of a notochord, a dorsal
Figure 4.14 Examples of
Echinodermata :
(a) Asterias
(b) Ophiura
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.15 Balanoglossus
Proboscis
Collar
Trunk
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 10 :
 46
BIOLOGY
hollow nerve cord and paired pharyngeal
gill slits (Figure 4.16). These are bilaterally
symmetrical, triploblastic,  coelomate with
organ-system level of organisation. They
possess a post anal tail and a closed circulatory
system.
Table 4.1 presents a comparison of salient
features of chordates and non-chordates.
Phylum Chordata is divided into three
subphyla: Urochordata or Tunicata,
Cephalochordata and Vertebrata.
Subphyla 
Urochordata 
and
Cephalochordata are often referred to as
protochordates (Figure 4.17) and are
exclusively marine. In Urochordata, notochord
is present only in larval tail, while in
Cephalochordata, it extends from head to tail
region and is persistent throughout their life.
Examples: Urochordata – Ascidia, Salpa,
Doliolum; Cephalochordata – Branchiostoma
(Amphioxus or Lancelet).
The members of subphylum Vertebrata
possess notochord during the embryonic
period. The notochord is replaced by a
cartilaginous or bony vertebral column in the
adult. Thus all vertebrates are chordates but
all chordates are not vertebrates. Besides the
basic chordate characters, vertebrates have a
ventral muscular heart with two, three or four
chambers, kidneys for excretion and
osmoregulation and paired appendages which
may be fins or limbs.
Nerve cord
Notochord
Post-anal part
Gill slits
Figure 4.16  Chordata characteristics
Figure 4.17  Ascidia
TABLE 4.1 Comparison of Chordates and Non-chordates
S.No. Chordates
Non-chordates
1.
Notochord present.
Notochord absent.
2.
Central nervous system is dorsal,
Central nervous system is ventral, solid
hollow and single.
and double.
3.
Pharynx perforated by gill slits.
Gill slits are absent.
4.
Heart is ventral.
Heart is dorsal (if present).
5.
A post-anal part (tail) is present.
Post-anal tail is absent.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 11 :
 ANIMAL KINGDOM
47
47
4.2.11.1
4.2.11.1
4.2.11.1
4.2.11.1
4.2.11.1
Class – Cyclostomata
Class – Cyclostomata
Class – Cyclostomata
Class – Cyclostomata
Class – Cyclostomata
All living members of the class Cyclostomata are
ectoparasites on some fishes. They have an
elongated body bearing 6-15 pairs of gill slits
for respiration. Cyclostomes have a sucking and
circular mouth without jaws (Fig. 4.18). Their
body is devoid of scales and paired fins.
Cranium and vertebral column are
cartilaginous. Circulation is of closed type.
Cyclostomes are marine but migrate for
spawning to fresh water. After spawning, within
a few days, they die. Their larvae, after
metamorphosis, return to the ocean.
Examples: Petromyzon (Lamprey) and Myxine
(Hagfish).
4.2.11.2
4.2.11.2
4.2.11.2
4.2.11.2
4.2.11.2
Class – Chondrichthyes
Class – Chondrichthyes
Class – Chondrichthyes
Class – Chondrichthyes
Class – Chondrichthyes
They are marine animals with streamlined body
and have cartilaginous endoskeleton
(Figure 4.19). Mouth is located ventrally.
Notochord is persistent throughout life. Gill
slits are separate and without operculum (gill
cover). The skin is tough, containing minute
placoid scales. Teeth are modified placoid
scales which are backwardly directed. Their
jaws are very powerful. These animals are
predaceous.  Due to the absence of air bladder,
they have to swim constantly to avoid sinking.
Vertebrata
Division
Agnatha
(lacks jaw)
Class
1. Cyclostomata
Gnathostomata
(bears jaw)
Super Class
Pisces
(bear fins)
Tetrapoda
(bear limbs)
Class
1. Amphibia
2. Reptilia
3. Aves
4. Mammals
Class
1. Chondrichthyes
2. Osteichthyes
The subphylum Vertebrata is further divided as follows:
Figure 4.18 A jawless vertebrate - Petromyzon
Figure 4.19 Example of Cartilaginous fishes :
(a) Scoliodon  (b) Pristis
(a)
(b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 12 :
 48
BIOLOGY
Heart is two-chambered (one auricle and one ventricle).
Some of them have electric organs (e.g., Torpedo) and
some possess poison sting (e.g., Trygon). They are
cold-blooded (poikilothermous) animals, i.e., they lack
the capacity to regulate their body temperature. Sexes
are separate. In males pelvic fins bear claspers. They
have internal fertilisation and many of them are
viviparous.
Examples: Scoliodon (Dog fish),  Pristis (Saw fish),
Carcharodon (Great white shark), Trygon (Sting ray).
4.2.11.3
4.2.11.3
4.2.11.3
4.2.11.3
4.2.11.3
Class – Osteichthyes
Class – Osteichthyes
Class – Osteichthyes
Class – Osteichthyes
Class – Osteichthyes
It includes both marine and fresh water fishes with bony
endoskeleton. Their body is streamlined. Mouth is
mostly terminal (Figure 4.20). They have four pairs of
gills which are covered by an operculum on each side.
Skin is covered with cycloid/ctenoid scales. Air bladder
is present which regulates buoyancy. Heart is two-
chambered (one auricle and one ventricle). They are
cold-blooded animals. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation
is usually external. They are mostly oviparous and
development is direct.
Examples: Marine – Exocoetus (Flying fish),
Hippocampus (Sea horse); Freshwater – Labeo (Rohu),
Catla (Katla), Clarias (Magur); Aquarium  – Betta
(Fighting fish), Pterophyllum (Angel fish).
4.2.11.4
4.2.11.4
4.2.11.4
4.2.11.4
4.2.11.4
Class – Amphibia
Class – Amphibia
Class – Amphibia
Class – Amphibia
Class – Amphibia
As the name indicates (Gr., Amphi : dual, bios, life),
amphibians can live in aquatic as well as terrestrial
habitats (Figure 4.21). Most of them have two pairs of
limbs. Body is divisible into head and trunk. Tail may
be present in some. The amphibian skin is moist
(without scales). The eyes have eyelids. A tympanum
represents the ear. Alimentary canal, urinary and
reproductive tracts open into a common chamber called
cloaca which opens to the exterior. Respiration is by
gills, lungs and through skin. The heart is three-
chambered (two auricles and one ventricle). These are
cold-blooded animals. Sexes are separate. Fertilisation
is external. They are oviparous and development
is indirect.
Examples: Bufo (Toad), Rana (Frog), Hyla (Tree frog),
Salamandra (Salamander), Ichthyophis (Limbless
amphibia).
Figure 4.21 Examples of Amphibia :
(a) Salamandra
(b) Rana
(a)
(b)
Figure 4.20 Examples of Bony fishes :
(a) Hippocampus (b) Catla
(b)
(a)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 13 :
 ANIMAL KINGDOM
49
49
4.2.11.5
4.2.11.5
4.2.11.5
4.2.11.5
4.2.11.5
Class – Reptilia
Class – Reptilia
Class – Reptilia
Class – Reptilia
Class – Reptilia
The class name refers to their creeping or crawling mode of locomotion
(Latin, repere or reptum, to creep or crawl). They are mostly terrestrial
animals and their body is covered by dry and cornified skin, epidermal
scales or scutes (Fig. 4.22). They do not have external ear openings.
Tympanum represents ear.  Limbs, when present, are two pairs. Heart is
usually three-chambered, but four-chambered in crocodiles. Reptiles are
poikilotherms. Snakes and lizards shed their scales as skin cast.  Sexes
are separate. Fertilisation is internal. They are oviparous and development
is direct.
Examples: Chelone (Turtle), Testudo (Tortoise), Chameleon (Tree lizard),
Calotes (Garden lizard), Crocodilus (Crocodile), Alligator (Alligator).
Hemidactylus (Wall lizard), Poisonous snakes – Naja (Cobra), Bangarus
(Krait), Vipera (Viper).
4.2.11.6
4.2.11.6
4.2.11.6
4.2.11.6
4.2.11.6
Class – Aves
Class – Aves
Class – Aves
Class – Aves
Class – Aves
The characteristic features of Aves (birds) are the presence of feathers
and most of them can fly except flightless birds (e.g., Ostrich). They possess
beak (Figure 4.23). The forelimbs are modified into wings. The hind limbs
generally have scales and are modified for walking, swimming or clasping
the tree branches. Skin is dry without glands except the oil gland at the
base of the tail. Endoskeleton is fully ossified (bony) and the long bones
are hollow with air cavities (pneumatic). The digestive tract of birds has
additional chambers, the crop and gizzard. Heart is completely four-
chambered. They are warm-blooded (homoiothermous) animals, i.e.,
they are able to maintain a constant body temperature. Respiration is by
Figure 4.22  Reptiles: (a) Chameleon (b) Crocodilus (c) Chelone (d) Naja
(b)
(c)
(a)
(d)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 14 :
 50
BIOLOGY
lungs. Air sacs connected to lungs supplement respiration. Sexes are
separate. Fertilisation is internal. They are oviparous and development is
direct.
Examples : Corvus (Crow), Columba (Pigeon), Psittacula (Parrot), Struthio
(Ostrich), Pavo (Peacock), Aptenodytes (Penguin), Neophron (Vulture).
4.2.11.7
4.2.11.7
4.2.11.7
4.2.11.7
4.2.11.7
Class – Mammalia
Class – Mammalia
Class – Mammalia
Class – Mammalia
Class – Mammalia
They are found in a variety of habitats – polar ice caps, deserts, mountains,
forests, grasslands and dark caves. Some of them have adapted to fly or
live in water. The most unique mammalian characteristic is the presence
of milk producing glands (mammary glands) by which the young ones
are nourished. They have two pairs of limbs, adapted for walking, running,
climbing, burrowing, swimming or flying (Figure 4.24). The skin of
(a)
Figure 4.23  Some birds : (a) Neophron  (b) Struthio (c) Psittacula (d) Pavo
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4.24 Some mammals : (a) Ornithorhynchus (b) Macropus (c) Pteropus (d) Balaenoptera
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 15 :
 ANIMAL KINGDOM
51
51
mammals is unique in possessing hair. External ears or pinnae are
present. Different types of teeth are present in the jaw. Heart is four-
chambered. They are homoiothermous. Respiration is by  lungs.  Sexes
are separate and fertilisation is internal. They are viviparous with few
exceptions and development is direct.
Examples: Oviparous-Ornithorhynchus (Platypus); Viviparous -
Macropus (Kangaroo), Pteropus (Flying fox), Camelus (Camel), Macaca
(Monkey), Rattus (Rat), Canis (Dog), Felis (Cat), Elephas (Elephant),
Equus (Horse), Delphinus (Common dolphin), Balaenoptera (Blue whale),
Panthera tigris (Tiger), Panthera leo (Lion).
The salient distinguishing features of all phyla under animal kingdom
is comprehensively given in the Table 4.2.
Level of
Organi-
sation
Cellular
Tissue
Tissue
Organ &
Organ-
system
Organ-
system
Organ-
system
Organ-
system
Organ-
system
Organ-
system
Organ-
system
Organ-
system
Symme-
try
Various
Radial
Radial
Bilateral
Bilateral
Bilateral
Bilateral
Bilateral
Radial
Bilateral
Bilateral
Coelom
Absent
Absent
Absent
Absent
Pseudo
coelo-
mate
Coelo-
mate
Coelo-
mate
Coelo-
mate
Coelo-
mate
Coelo-
mate
Coelo-
mate
Segmen-
tation
Absent
Absent
Absent
Absent
Absent
Present
Present
Absent
Absent
Absent
Present
Digestive
System
Absent
Incomplete
Incomplete
Incomplete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Complete
Circu-
latory
System
Absent
Absent
Absent
Absent
Absent
Present
Present
Present
Present
Present
Present
Respi-
ratory
System
Absent
Absent
Absent
Absent
Absent
Absent
Present
Present
Present
Present
Present
Distinctive
Features
Body with pores
and canals in walls.
Cnidoblasts
present.
Comb plates for
locomotion.
Flat body, suckers.
Often worm-
shaped,
elongated.
Body segment-
ation like rings.
Exoskeleton of cu-
ticle, jointed ap-
pendages.
External skeleton
of  shell usually
present.
Water vascular
system, 
radial
symmetry.
Worm-like with
proboscis, collar
and trunk.
Notochord, dorsal
hollow nerve cord,
gill 
slits 
with
limbs or fins.
Phylum
Porifera
Coelenterata
(Cnidaria)
Ctenophora
Platyhelm-
inthes
Aschelmin-
thes
Annelida
Arthropoda
Mollusca
Echino-
dermata
Hemi-
chordata
Chordata
TABLE 4.2  Salient Features of Different Phyla in the Animal Kingdom
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 16 :
 52
BIOLOGY
SUMMARY
The basic fundamental features such as level of organisation, symmetry,
cell organisation, coelom, segmentation, notochord, etc., have enabled us
to broadly classify the animal kingdom. Besides the fundamental features,
there are many other distinctive characters which are specific for each
phyla or class.
Porifera includes multicellular animals which exhibit cellular level of
organisation and have characteristic flagellated choanocytes. The
coelenterates have tentacles and bear cnidoblasts. They are mostly aquatic,
sessile or free-floating. The ctenophores are marine animals with comb
plates. The platyhelminths have flat body and exhibit bilateral symmetry.
The parasitic forms show distinct suckers and hooks. Aschelminthes are
pseudocoelomates and  include parasitic as well as non-parasitic
roundworms.
Annelids are metamerically segmented animals with a true coelom.
The arthropods are the most abundant group of animals characterised
by the presence of jointed appendages. The molluscs have a soft body
surrounded by an external calcareous shell. The body is covered with
external skeleton made of chitin. The echinoderms possess a spiny skin.
Their most distinctive feature is the presence of water vascular system.
The hemichordates are a small group of worm-like marine animals. They
have a cylindrical body with proboscis, collar and trunk.
Phylum Chordata includes animals which possess a notochord either
throughout or during early embryonic life. Other common features
observed in the chordates are the dorsal, hollow nerve cord and paired
pharyngeal gill slits. Some of the vertebrates do not possess jaws (Agnatha)
whereas most of them possess jaws (Gnathostomata). Agnatha is
represented by the class, Cyclostomata. They are the most primitive
chordates and are ectoparasites on fishes. Gnathostomata has two super
classes, Pisces and Tetrapoda. Classes Chondrichthyes and Osteichthyes
bear fins for locomotion and are grouped under Pisces. The
Chondrichthyes are fishes with cartilaginous endoskeleton and are marine.
Classes, Amphibia, Reptilia, Aves and Mammalia have two pairs of limbs
and are thus grouped under Tetrapoda. The amphibians have adapted
to live both on land and water. Reptiles are characterised by the presence
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 17 :
 ANIMAL KINGDOM
53
53
of dry and cornified skin. Limbs are absent in snakes. Fishes, amphibians
and reptiles are poikilothermous (cold-blooded). Aves are warm-blooded
animals with feathers on their bodies and forelimbs modified into wings
for flying. Hind limbs are adapted for walking, swimming, perching or
clasping. The unique features of mammals are the presence of mammary
glands and hairs on the skin. They commonly exhibit viviparity.
EXERCISES
1. What are the difficulties that you would face in classification of animals,
if common fundamental features are not taken into account?
2. If you are given a specimen, what are the steps that you would follow to
classify it?
3. How useful is the study of the nature of body cavity and coelom in the
classification of animals?
4. Distinguish between intracellular and extracellular digestion?
5. What is the difference between direct and indirect development?
6. What are the peculiar features that you find in parasitic
platyhelminthes?
7. What are the reasons that you can think of for the arthropods to
constitute the largest group of the animal kingdom?
8. Water vascular system is the characteristic of which group of the
following:
(a) Porifera  (b) Ctenophora  (c) Echinodermata  (d) Chordata
9. “All vertebrates are chordates but all chordates are not vertebrates”.
Justify the statement.
10. How important is the presence of air bladder in Pisces?
11. What are the modifications that are observed in birds that help them
fly?
12. Could the number of eggs or young ones produced by an oviparous and
viviparous mother be equal? Why?
13. Segmentation in the body is first observed in which of the following:
(a) Platyhelminthes  (b) Aschelminthes  (c) Annelida  (d) Arthropoda
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 18 :
 54
BIOLOGY
14. Match the following:
(a) Operculum
(i)
Ctenophora
(b) Parapodia
(ii)
Mollusca
(c) Scales
(iii)
Porifera
(d) Comb plates
(iv)
Reptilia
(e) Radula
(v)
Annelida
(f ) Hairs
(vi)
Cyclostomata and Chondrichthyes
(g) Choanocytes
(vii)
Mammalia
(h) Gill slits
(viii)
Osteichthyes
15. Prepare a list of some animals that are found parasitic on human
beings.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 1 :
 UNIT 2
The description of the diverse forms of life on earth was made only by
observation – through naked eyes or later through magnifying lenses
and microscopes. This description is mainly of gross structural features,
both external and internal. In addition, observable and perceivable
living phenomena were also recorded as part of this description. Before
experimental biology or more specifically, physiology, was established
as a part of biology, naturalists described only biology. Hence, biology
remained as a natural history for a long time. The description, by itself,
was amazing in terms of detail. While the initial reaction of a student
could be boredom, one should keep in mind  that the detailed description,
was utilised in the later day reductionist biology where living processes
drew more attention from scientists than the description of life forms
and their structure. Hence, this description became meaningful and
helpful in framing research questions in physiology or evolutionary
biology. In the following chapters of this unit, the structural organisation
of plants and animals, including the structural basis of physiologial or
behavioural phenomena, is described. For convenience, this description
of morphological and anatomical features is presented separately for
plants and animals.
STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION
IN PLANTS AND ANIMALS
Chapter 5
Morphology of
Flowering Plants
Chapter 6
Anatomy of Flowering
Plants
Chapter 7
Structural Organisation in
Animals
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 2 :
 KATHERINE ESAU was born in Ukraine in 1898. She  studied
agriculture in Russia and Germany and received her doctorate
in 1931 in United States. She reported in her early publications
that the curly top virus spreads through a plant via the food-
conducting or phloem tissue. Dr Esau’s Plant Anatomy published
in 1954 took a dynamic, developmental approach designed to
enhance one’s understanding of plant structure and an
enormous impact worldwide, literally bringing about a revival
of the discipline. The Anatomy of Seed Plants by Katherine Esau
was published in 1960. It was referred to as Webster’s of plant
biology – it is encyclopediac. In 1957 she was elected to the
National Academy of Sciences, becoming the sixth woman to
receive that honour. In addition to this prestigious award, she
received the National Medal of Science from President George
Bush in 1989.
When Katherine Esau died in the year 1997, Peter Raven,
director of Anatomy and Morphology, Missouri Botanical
Garden, remembered that she  ‘absolutely dominated’ the field
of plant biology even at the age of 99.
Katherine Esau
(1898 – 1997)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 3 :
 The wide range in the structure of higher plants will never fail to fascinate
us. Even though the angiosperms show such a large diversity in external
structure or morphology, they are all characterised by presence of roots,
stems, leaves, flowers and fruits.
In chapters 2 and 3, we talked about classification of plants based
on morphological and other characteristics. For any successful attempt
at classification and at understanding any higher plant (or for that
matter any living organism) we need to know standard technical terms
and  standard definitions. We also need to know about the possible
variations in different parts, found as adaptations of the plants to their
environment, e.g., adaptions to various habitats, for protection,
climbing, storage, etc.
If you pull out any weed you will see that all of them have roots, stems
and leaves. They may be bearing flowers and fruits. The underground
part of the flowering plant is the root system while the portion above the
ground  forms the shoot system (Figure 5.1).
5.1
THE ROOT
In majority of the dicotyledonous plants, the direct elongation of the radicle
leads to the formation of primary root which grows inside the soil.
It bears lateral roots of several orders that are referred to as secondary,
tertiary, etc. roots. The primary roots and its branches constitute the
MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
CHAPTER  5
5.1 The Root
5.2  The Stem
5.3 The Leaf
5.4 The Inflorescence
5.5 The Flower
5.6 The Fruit
5.7 The Seed
5.8 Semi-technical
Description of a
Typical
Flowering Plant
5.9 Description of
Some Important
Families
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 4 :
 58
BIOLOGY
Flower
Shoot
system
Root
system
Fruit
Bud
Stem
Leaf
Node
Internode
Primary
root
Secondary
root
{
Figure 5.2 Different types of roots : (a) Tap  (b) Fibrous  (c) Adventitious
(c)
(b)
Figure 5.1  Parts of a flowering plant
Fibrous roots
Adventitious roots
Laterals
(a)
Main root
tap root system, as seen in the mustard
plant (Figure 5.2a). In monocotyledonous
plants, the primary root is short lived and
is replaced by a large number of roots.
These roots originate from the base of the
stem and constitute the fibrous root
system, as seen in the wheat plant (Figure
5.2b). In some plants, like grass,
Monstera and the banyan tree, roots arise
from parts of the plant other than the
radicle and are called adventitious roots
(Figure 5.2c). The main functions of the
root system are absorption of water and
minerals from the soil, providing a proper
anchorage to the plant parts, storing
reserve food material and synthesis of
plant growth regulators.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 5 :
 MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
59
5.1.1
Regions of the Root
The root is covered at the apex by a thimble-like
structure called the root cap     (Figure 5.3). . . . . It
protects the tender apex of the root as it makes
its way through the soil. A few millimetres above
the root cap is the region of meristematic
activity.  The cells of this region are very small,
thin-walled and with dense protoplasm. They
divide repeatedly. The cells proximal to this
region undergo rapid elongation and
enlargement and are responsible for the growth
of the root in length. This region is called the
region of elongation. The cells of the elongation
zone gradually differentiate and mature. Hence,
this zone, proximal to region of elongation, is
called the region of maturation.  From this
region some of the epidermal cells form very fine
and delicate, thread-like structures called root
hairs. These root hairs absorb water and
minerals from the soil.
Figure 5.3  The regions of the root-tip
5.2
THE STEM
What are the features that distinguish a stem from a root? The stem is the
ascending part of the axis bearing branches, leaves, flowers and fruits. It
develops from the plumule of the embryo of a germinating seed. The stem
bears nodes and internodes. The region of the stem where leaves are
born are called nodes while internodes are the portions between two nodes.
The stem bears buds, which may be terminal or axillary. Stem is generally
green when young and later often become woody and dark brown.
The main function of the stem is spreading out branches bearing
leaves, flowers and fruits. It conducts water, minerals and photosynthates.
Some stems perform the function of storage of food, support, protection
and of vegetative propagation.
5.3
THE LEAF
The leaf is a lateral, generally flattened structure borne on the stem. It
develops at the node and bears a bud in its axil. The axillary bud later
develops into a branch. Leaves originate from shoot apical meristems and
are arranged in an acropetal order. They are the most important vegetative
organs for photosynthesis.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 6 :
 60
BIOLOGY
A typical leaf consists of three main parts:  leaf
base, petiole and lamina (Figure 5.4 a). The leaf is
attached to the stem by the leaf base and may bear
two lateral small leaf like structures called stipules.
In monocotyledons, the leaf base expands into a
sheath covering the stem partially or wholly. In some
leguminous plants the leafbase may become
swollen, which is called the pulvinus. The petiole
help hold the blade to light. Long thin flexible
petioles allow leaf blades to flutter in wind, thereby
cooling the leaf and bringing fresh air to leaf surface.
The lamina or the leaf blade is the green expanded
part of the leaf with veins and veinlets. There is,
usually, a middle prominent vein, which is known
as the midrib. Veins provide rigidity to the leaf blade
and act as channels of transport for water, minerals
and food materials. The shape, margin, apex, surface
and extent of incision of lamina varies in different
leaves.
5.3.1
Venation
The arrangement of veins and the veinlets in the
lamina of leaf is termed as venation. When the
veinlets form a network, the venation is termed as
reticulate (Figure 5.4 b). When the veins run
parallel to each other within a lamina, the venation
is termed as parallel (Figure 5.4 c). Leaves of
dicotyledonous plants generally possess reticulate
venation, while parallel venation is the characteristic
of most monocotyledons.
5.3.2
Types of Leaves
A leaf is said to be simple, when its lamina is entire
or when incised, the incisions do not touch the
midrib. When the incisions of the lamina reach up
to the midrib breaking it into a number of leaflets,
the leaf is called compound. A bud is present
in the axil of petiole in both simple and compound
leaves, but not in the axil of leaflets of the compound
leaf.
The compound leaves may be of two types
(Figure 5.5). In a pinnately compound leaf a
Figure 5.4
Structure of a leaf :
(a) Parts of a leaf
(b) Reticulate venation
(c) Parallel venation
(b)
(c)
(b) Silk Cotton
(a)
Lamina
Petiole
Stipule
Leaf
base
Axillary
bud
(a) Neem
Figure 5.5
Compound leaves :
(a) pinnately compound leaf
(b) palmately compound leaf
Rachis
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 7 :
 MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
61
number of leaflets are present on a common
axis, the rachis, which represents the midrib
of the leaf as in neem.
In palmately compound leaves, the
leaflets are attached at a common point, i.e.,
at the tip of petiole, as in silk cotton.
5.3.3
Phyllotaxy
Phyllotaxy is the pattern of arrangement of
leaves on the stem or branch. This is usually
of three types – alternate, opposite and
whorled (Figure 5.6). In alternate type of
phyllotaxy,  a single leaf arises at each node
in alternate manner, as in china rose,
mustard and sun flower plants. In opposite
type, a pair of leaves arise at each node and
lie opposite to each other as in Calotropis and
guava plants. If more than two leaves arise
at a node and form a whorl, it is called
whorled, as in Alstonia.
5.4
THE INFLORESCENCE
A flower is a modified shoot wherein the shoot
apical meristem changes to floral meristem.
Internodes do not elongate and the axis gets
condensed. The apex produces different
kinds of floral appendages laterally at
successive nodes instead of leaves.  When a
shoot tip transforms into a flower, it is always
solitary. The arrangement of flowers on the
floral axis is termed as inflorescence.
Depending on whether the apex gets
developed into a flower or continues to grow,
two major types of inflorescences are defined
– racemose and cymose. In racemose type
of inflorescences the main axis continues to
grow, the flowers are borne laterally in an
acropetal succession (Figure 5.7).
In cymose type of  inflorescence the main
axis terminates in a flower, hence is limited
in growth.The flowers are borne in a basipetal
order (Figure 5.7).
Figure 5.6 Different types of phyllotaxy :
(a) Alternate (b) Opposite
(c) Whorled
(c) Alstonia
(a) China rose
(b) Guava
Figure 5.7  Racemose inflorescence
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 8 :
 62
BIOLOGY
5.5
THE FLOWER
The flower is the reproductive unit in the
angiosperms. It is meant for sexual reproduction.
A typical flower has four different kinds of whorls
arranged successively on the swollen end of the
stalk or pedicel, called thalamus or receptacle.
These are calyx, corolla, androecium and
gynoecium. Calyx and corolla are accessory
organs, while androecium and gynoecium are
reproductive organs. In some flowers like lily, the
calyx and corolla are not distinct and are termed
as perianth. When a flower has both androecium and gynoecium, it is
bisexual. A flower having either only stamens or only carpels is
unisexual.
In symmetry, the flower may be actinomorphic (radial symmetry) or
zygomorphic (bilateral symmetry). When a flower can be divided into
two equal radial halves in any radial plane passing through the centre, it
is said to be actinomorphic, e.g., mustard, datura, chilli. When it can be
divided into two similar halves only in one particular vertical plane, it is
zygomorphic, e.g., pea, gulmohur, bean, Cassia. A flower is asymmetric
(irregular) if it cannot be divided into two similar halves by any vertical
plane passing through the centre, as in canna.
A flower may be trimerous, tetramerous or pentamerous when
the floral appendages are in multiple of 3, 4 or 5, respectively. Flowers
with bracts-reduced leaf found at the base of the pedicel-are called
bracteate and those without bracts, ebracteate.
Figure 5.8  Cymose inflorescence
Figure 5.9
Position of floral parts on thalamus : (a) Hypogynous (b)  and (c)
Perigynous  (d) Epigynous
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 9 :
 MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
63
Based on the position of calyx, corolla and androecium in respect of
the ovary on thalamus, the flowers are described as hypogynous,
perigynous and epigynous (Figure 5.9). In the hypogynous flower the
gynoecium occupies the highest position while the other parts are situated
below it. The ovary in such flowers is said to be superior, e.g., mustard,
china rose and brinjal. If gynoecium is situated in the centre and other
parts of the flower are located on the rim of the thalamus almost at the
same level, it is called perigynous. The ovary here is said to be half
inferior, e.g., plum, rose, peach. In epigynous flowers, the margin of
thalamus grows upward enclosing the ovary completely and getting fused
with it, the other parts of flower arise above the ovary. Hence, the ovary is
said to be inferior as in flowers of guava and cucumber, and the ray
florets of sunflower.
5.5.1
Parts of a Flower
Each flower normally has four floral whorls, viz., calyx, corolla,
androecium and gynoecium (Figure 5.10).
5.5.1.1
5.5.1.1
5.5.1.1
5.5.1.1
5.5.1.1
Calyx
Calyx
Calyx
Calyx
Calyx
The calyx is the outermost whorl of the flower and the members are called
sepals. Generally, sepals are green, leaf like and protect the flower in the
bud stage. The calyx may be gamosepalous (sepals united) or
polysepalous (sepals free).
5.5.1.2
5.5.1.2
5.5.1.2
5.5.1.2
5.5.1.2
Corolla
Corolla
Corolla
Corolla
Corolla
Corolla is composed of petals. Petals are usually brightly coloured to
attract insects for pollination. Like calyx, corolla may also be
gamopetalous (petals united) or polypetalous (petals free). The shape
and colour of corolla vary greatly in plants. Corolla may be tubular, bell-
shaped, funnel-shaped or wheel-shaped.
Aestivation: The mode of arrangement of sepals or petals in floral bud
with respect to the other members of the same whorl is known as
aestivation. The main types of aestivation are valvate, twisted, imbricate
Pedicel
Calyx
Corolla
Androecium
Gynoecium
Figure 5.10  Parts of a flower
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 10 :
 64
BIOLOGY
and vexillary (Figure 5.11). When sepals or petals in a whorl just touch
one another at the margin, without overlapping, as in Calotropis, it is
said to be valvate. If one margin of  the appendage overlaps that of the
next one and so on as in china rose, lady’s finger and cotton, it is called
twisted.  If the margins of sepals or petals overlap one another but not in
any particular direction as in Cassia and gulmohur, the aestivation is
called imbricate. In pea and bean flowers, there are five petals, the largest
(standard) overlaps the two lateral petals (wings) which in turn overlap
the two smallest anterior petals (keel);  this type of aestivation is known
as vexillary or papilionaceous.
5.5.1.3
5.5.1.3
5.5.1.3
5.5.1.3
5.5.1.3
Androecium
Androecium
Androecium
Androecium
Androecium
Androecium is composed of stamens. Each stamen which represents the
male reproductive organ consists of a stalk or a filament and an anther.
Each anther is usually bilobed and each lobe has two chambers, the
pollen-sacs. The pollen grains are produced in pollen-sacs. A sterile stamen
is called staminode.
Stamens of flower may be united with other members such as petals
or among themselves. When stamens are attached to the petals, they are
epipetalous as in brinjal, or epiphyllous when attached to the perianth
as in the flowers of lily. The stamens in a flower may either remain free
(polyandrous) or may be united in varying degrees. The stamens may be
united into one bunch or one bundle (monoadelphous) as in china rose,
or two bundles (diadelphous) as in pea, or into more than two  bundles
(polyadelphous) as in citrus. There may be a variation in the length of
filaments within a flower, as in Salvia and mustard.
Figure 5.11 Types of aestivation in corolla : (a) Valvate (b) Twisted (c) Imbricate (d) Vexillary
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 11 :
 MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
65
5.5.1.4
5.5.1.4
5.5.1.4
5.5.1.4
5.5.1.4
Gynoecium
Gynoecium
Gynoecium
Gynoecium
Gynoecium
Gynoecium is the female reproductive part of the flower and is made
up of one or more carpels. A carpel consists of three parts namely
stigma, style and ovary. Ovary is the enlarged basal part, on which
lies the elongated tube, the style. The style connects the ovary to the
stigma. The stigma is usually at the tip of the style and is the
receptive surface for pollen grains. Each ovary bears one or more
ovules attached to a flattened, cushion-like placenta. When more
than one carpel is present, they may be free (as in lotus and rose)
and are called apocarpous. They are termed syncarpous when
carpels are fused, as in mustard and tomato. After fertilisation, the
ovules develop into seeds and the ovary matures into a fruit.
Placentation: The arrangement of ovules within the ovary is known
as placentation. The placentation are of different types namely,
marginal, axile, parietal, basal, central and free central (Figure 5.12).
In marginal  placentation the placenta forms a ridge along the
ventral suture of the ovary and the ovules are borne on this ridge
forming two rows, as in pea. When the  placenta is axial and the
ovules are attached to it in a multilocular ovary, the placentaion is
said to be axile, as in china rose, tomato and lemon. In parietal
placentation, the ovules develop on the inner wall of the ovary or
on peripheral part. Ovary is one-chambered but it becomes two-
chambered due to the formation of the false septum, e.g., mustard
and Argemone. When the ovules are borne on central axis and
septa are absent, as in Dianthus and Primrose the placentation is
called free central. In basal placentation, the placenta develops
at the base of ovary and a single ovule is attached to it, as in
sunflower, marigold.
5.6
THE FRUIT
The fruit is a characteristic feature of the flowering plants. It is a
mature or ripened ovary, developed after fertilisation. If a fruit is
formed without fertilisation of the ovary, it is called a
parthenocarpic fruit.
Generally, the fruit consists of a wall or pericarp and seeds.
The pericarp may be dry or fleshy. When pericarp is thick and
fleshy, it is differentiated into the outer epicarp, the middle
mesocarp and the inner endocarp.
In mango and coconut, the fruit is known as a drupe (Figure
5.13). They develop from monocarpellary superior ovaries and are
one seeded. In mango the pericarp is well differentiated into an
Figure 5.12 Types of
placentation :
(a) Marginal
(b) Axile
(c) Parietal
(d) Free central
(e) Basal
(a)
(e)
(b)
(d)
(c)
(a)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 12 :
 66
BIOLOGY
Seed coat
Hilum
Micropyle
Cotyledon
Plumule
Radicle
Figure 5.14 Structure of dicotyledonous seed
outer thin epicarp, a middle fleshy edible mesocarp and an inner stony
hard endocarp. In coconut which is also a drupe, the mesocarp is fibrous.
5.7
THE SEED
The ovules after fertilisation, develop into seeds. A seed is made up of a
seed coat and an embryo. The embryo is made up of a radicle, an embryonal
axis and one (as in wheat, maize) or two cotyledons (as in gram and pea).
5.7.1
Structure of a Dicotyledonous Seed
The outermost covering of a seed is the seed coat. The seed coat has two
layers, the outer testa and the inner tegmen. The hilum is a scar on the
seed coat through which the developing seeds were attached to the fruit.
Above the hilum is a small pore called the
micropyle. Within the seed coat is the embryo,
consisting of an embryonal axis and two
cotyledons. The cotyledons are often fleshy and
full of reserve food materials. At the two ends of
the embryonal axis are present the radicle and
the plumule (Figure 5.14). In some seeds such
as castor the endosperm formed as a result of
double fertilisation, is a food storing tissue and
called endospermic seeds. In plants such as
bean, gram and pea, the endosperm is not
present in mature seeds and such seeds are
called non-endospermous.
5.7.2
Structure of Monocotyledonous Seed
Generally, monocotyledonous seeds are endospermic but some as in
orchids are non-endospermic. In the seeds of cereals such as maize the
Figure 5.13  Parts of a fruit : (a) Mango  (b) Coconut
(a)
(b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 13 :
 MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
67
Figure 5.15 Structure of a monocotyledonous seed
Seed coat & fruit-wall
Aleurone layer
Endosperm
Scutellum
Coleoptile
Plumule
Radicle
Coleorhiza
Endosperm
Embryo
seed coat is membranous and generally fused with the fruit wall. The
endosperm is bulky and stores food. The outer covering of endosperm
separates the embryo by a proteinous layer called aleurone layer. The
embryo is   small and situated in a groove at one end of the endosperm. It
consists of one large and shield shaped cotyledon known as scutellum
and     a short axis with a plumule and a     radicle. The plumule and radicle
are enclosed in sheaths which are called coleoptile and
coleorhiza  respectively (Figure 5.15).
5.8
SEMI-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION OF A TYPICAL
FLOWERING PLANT
Various morphological features are used to describe a
flowering plant. The description has to be brief, in a simple
and scientific language and presented in a proper
sequence. The plant is described beginning with its habit,
vegetative characters – roots, stem and leaves and then
floral characters inflorescence and flower parts. After
describing various parts of plant, a floral diagram and a
floral formula are presented. The floral formula is
represented by some symbols. In the floral formula, Br
stands for bracteate K stands for calyx , C for corolla, P
for perianth, A for androecium and G for Gynoecium, G
for superior ovary and G  for inferior ovary, 
 for male,
 for female, 
 for bisexual plants, ⊕ for actinomorphic
Figure 5.16 Floral diagram with
floral formula
⊕
 K2+2 C4 A2+4 G(2)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 14 :
 68
BIOLOGY
and 
 for zygomorphic nature of flower. Fusion is indicated by enclosing
the figure within bracket and adhesion by a line drawn above the symbols
of the floral parts. A floral diagram provides information about the number
of parts of a flower, their arrangement and the relation they have with one
another (Figure 5.16). The position of the mother axis with respect to the
flower is represented by a dot on the top of the floral diagram. Calyx,
corolla, androecium and gynoecium are drawn in successive whorls, calyx
being the outermost and the gynoecium being in the centre. Floral formula
also shows cohesion and adhesion within parts of whorls and between
whorls. The floral diagram and floral formula in Figure 5.16 represents
the mustard plant (Family: Brassicaceae).
5.9
SOLANACEAE
It is a large family, commonly called as the ‘potato family’. It is widely
distributed in tropics, subtropics and even temperate zones (Figure 5.17).
Vegetative Characters
Plants mostly herbs, shrubs and rarely small trees
Stem: herbaceous rarely woody, aerial; erect, cylindrical, branched, solid
or hollow, hairy or glabrous, underground stem in potato (Solanum
tuberosum)
Leaves: alternate, simple, rarely pinnately compound, exstipulate;
venation reticulate
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 5.17 Solanum nigrum (makoi) plant :  (a) Flowering twig  (b) Flower
(c) L.S. of flower  (d) Stamens  (e) Carpel  (f) Floral diagram
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 15 :
 MORPHOLOGY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
69
Floral Characters
Inflorescence : Solitary, axillary or cymose as in Solanum
Flower: bisexual, actinomorphic
Calyx: sepals five, united, persistent, valvate aestivation
Corolla: petals five, united; valvate aestivation
Androecium: stamens five, epipetalous
Gynoecium: bicarpellary obligately placed, syncarpous; ovary superior,
bilocular, placenta swollen with many ovules, axile
Fruits: berry or capsule
Seeds: many, endospermous
Floral Formula: ⊕
Economic Importance
Many plants belonging to this family are source of food (tomato, brinjal,
potato), spice (chilli); medicine (belladonna, ashwagandha);  fumigatory
(tobacco); ornamentals (petunia).
SUMMARY
Flowering plants exhibit enormous variation in shape, size, structure,
mode of nutrition, life span, habit and habitat. They have well developed
root and shoot systems. Root system is either tap root or fibrous. Generally,
dicotyledonous plants have tap roots while monocotyledonous plants have
fibrous roots. The roots in some plants get modified for storage of food,
mechanical support and respiration. The shoot system is differentiated
into stem, leaves, flowers and fruits. The morphological features of stems
like the presence of nodes and internodes, multicellular hair and positively
phototropic nature help to differentiate the stems from roots. Leaf is a
lateral outgrowth of stem developed exogeneously at the node. These are
green in colour to perform the function of photosynthesis. Leaves exhibit
marked variations in their shape, size, margin, apex and extent of incisions
of leaf blade (lamina).
The flower is a modified shoot, meant for sexual reproduction. The
flowers are arranged in different types of inflorescences. They exhibit
enormous variation in structure, symmetry, position of ovary in relation
to other parts, arrangement of petals, sepals, ovules etc. After fertilisation,
the ovary is modified into fruits and ovules into seeds. Seeds either may
be monocotyledonous or dicotyledonous. They vary in shape, size and
period of viability. The floral characteristics form the basis of classification
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 16 :
 70
BIOLOGY
and identification of flowering plants. This can be illustrated through semi-
technical descriptions of families. Hence, a flowering plant is described in
a definite sequence by using scientific terms. The floral features are
represented in the summarised form as floral diagrams and floral formula.
EXERCISES
1. How is a pinnately compound leaf different from a palmately compound
leaf?
2. Explain with suitable examples the different types of phyllotaxy.
3. Define the following terms:
(a) aestivation
(b) placentation
(c) actinomorphic
(d) zygomorphic
(e) superior ovary
(f) perigynous flower
(g) epipetalous stamen
4. Differentiate between
(a) Racemose and cymose inflorescence
(b) Apocarpous and syncarpous ovary
5. Draw the labelled diagram of the following:
(i) gram seed  (ii)  V.S. of maize seed
6. Take one flower of the family Solanaceae and write its semi-technical
description. Also draw their floral diagram.
7. Describe the various types of placentations found in flowering plants.
8. What is a flower? Describe the parts of a typical angiosperm flower.
9.
Define the term inflorescence. Explain the basis for the different types
inflorescence in flowering plants.
10.
Describe the arrangement of floral members in relation to their
insertion on thalamus.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 1 :
 STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS
79
In the preceding chapters you came across a large variety of organisms,
both unicellular and multicellular, of the animal kingdom. In unicellular
organisms, all functions like digestion, respiration and reproduction
are performed by a single cell. In the complex body of multicellular
animals the same basic functions are carried out by different groups of
cells in a well organised manner. The body of a simple organism like
Hydra is made of different types of cells and the number of cells in each
type can be in thousands. The human body is composed of billions of
cells to perform various functions. How do these cells in the body work
together? As you have already learnt in your earlier classes, in
multicellular animals, a group of similar cells alongwith intercellular
substances perform a specific function. Such an organisation is called
tissue.
You may be surprised to know that all complex animals consist of
only four basic types of tissues. These tissues are organised in specific
proportion and pattern to form an organ like stomach, lung, heart and
kidney. When two or more organs perform a common function by their
physical and/or chemical interaction, they together form organ system,
e.g., digestive system, respiratory system, etc. Cells, tissues, organs and
organ systems split up the work in a way that exhibits division of labour
and contribute to the survival of the body as a whole.
7.1 ORGAN AND ORGAN SYSTEM
The basic tissues as you have learnt in earlier classes, organise to form
organs which in turn associate to form organ systems in the multicellular
organisms. Such an organisation is essential for more efficient and better
coordinated activities of millions of cells constituting an organism. Each
STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN
ANIMALS
CHAPTER  7
7.1
Organ and Organ
System
7.2
Frogs
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 2 :
 80
BIOLOGY
organ in our body is made of one or more type of tissues. For example,
our heart consists of all the four types of tissues, i.e., epithelial, connective,
muscular and neural. We also notice, after some careful study that the
complexity in organ and organ systems displays certain discernable trend.
This discernable trend is called evolutionary trend (You will study the
details in class XII). In this chapter, you are being introduced to
morphology and anatomy of frog. Morphology refers to study of form or
externally visible features. In the case of plants or microbes, the term
morphology precisely means only this. In case of animals this refers to
the external appearance of the organs or parts of the body. The word
anatomy conventionally is used for the study of morphology of internal
organs in the animals. You will learn the morphology and anatomy of
frog representing vertebrates.
7.2 FROGS
Frogs can live both on land and in freshwater and belong to class Amphibia
of phylum Chordata. The most common species of frog found in India is
Rana tigrina.
They do not have constant body temperature i.e., their body
temperature varies with the temperature of the environment. Such animals
are called cold blooded or poikilotherms. You might have also noticed
changes in the colour of the frogs while they are in grasses and on dry
land. They have the ability to change the colour to hide them from their
enemies (camouflage). This protective coloration is called mimicry.  You
may also know that frogs are not seen during peak summer and winter.
During this period they take shelter in deep burrows to protect them
from extreme heat and cold. This is known as summer sleep (aestivation)
and winter sleep (hibernation) respectively.
7.2.1 Morphology
Have you ever touched the skin of frog? The skin is smooth and slippery
due to the presence of mucus. The skin is always maintained in a moist
condition. The colour of dorsal side of body is
generally olive green with dark irregular spots.  On
the ventral side the skin is uniformly pale yellow.
The frog never drinks water but absorb it through
the skin.
Body of a frog is divisible into head and trunk
(Figure 7.1). A neck and tail are absent. Above the
mouth, a pair of nostrils is present.  Eyes are bulged
and covered by a nictitating membrane that
protects them while in water. On either side of eyes
a membranous tympanum (ear) receives sound
signals. The forelimbs and hind limbs help in
Figure 7.1  External features of frog
Eye
Fore limb
Hind limb
Head
Trunk
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 3 :
 STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS
81
swimming, walking, leaping and burrowing. The hind limbs end in five
digits and they are larger and muscular than fore limbs that end in four
digits. Feet have webbed digits that help in swimming. Frogs exhibit sexual
dimorphism. Male frogs can be distinguished by the presence of sound
producing vocal sacs and also a copulatory pad on the first digit of the
fore limbs which are absent in female frogs.
7.2.2 Anatomy
The body cavity of frogs accommodate different organ systems such as
digestive, circulatory, respiratory, nervous, excretory and reproductive
systems with well developed structures and functions  (Figure 7.2).
The digestive system consists of alimentary canal and digestive glands.
The alimentary canal is short because frogs are carnivores and hence the
length of intestine is reduced. The mouth opens into the buccal cavity that
leads to the oesophagus through pharynx. Oesophagus is a short tube
that opens into the stomach which in turn continues as the intestine, rectum
and finally opens outside by the cloaca.  Liver secretes bile that is stored in
the gall bladder. Pancreas, a digestive gland produces pancreatic juice
Figure 7.2
Diagrammatic representation of internal organs of frog showing
complete digestive system
Intestine
Ureter
Rectum
Cloaca
Urinary
bladder
Oesophagus
Liver
Stomach
Kidney
Gall
bladder
Fat bodies
Lung
Heart
Cloacal Aperture
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 4 :
 82
BIOLOGY
containing digestive enzymes. Food is captured by the bilobed tongue.
Digestion of food takes place by the action of HCl and gastric juices secreted
from  the walls of the stomach. Partially digested food called chyme is passed
from stomach to the first part of the small intestine, the duodenum. The
duodenum receives bile from gall bladder and pancreatic juices from the
pancreas through a common bile duct. Bile emulsifies fat and pancreatic
juices digest carbohydrates and proteins. Final digestion takes place in the
intestine. Digested food is absorbed by the numerous finger-like folds in
the inner wall of intestine called villi and microvilli. The undigested solid
waste moves into the rectum and passes out through cloaca.
Frogs respire on land and in the water by two different methods. In
water, skin acts as aquatic respiratory organ (cutaneous respiration).
Dissolved oxygen in the water is exchanged through the skin by diffusion.
On land, the buccal cavity, skin and lungs act as the respiratory organs.
The respiration by lungs is called pulmonary respiration. The lungs are a
pair of elongated, pink coloured sac-like structures present in the upper
part of the trunk region (thorax). Air enters through the nostrils into the
buccal cavity and then to lungs. During aestivation and hibernation
gaseous exchange takes place through skin.
The vascular system of frog is well-developed closed type. Frogs have
a lymphatic system also. The blood vascular system involves heart, blood
vessels and blood. The lymphatic system consists of lymph, lymph
channels and lymph nodes. Heart is a muscular structure situated in the
upper part of the body cavity. It has three chambers, two atria and one
ventricle and is covered by a membrane called pericardium. A triangular
structure called sinus venosus joins the right atrium. It receives blood
through the major veins called vena cava. The ventricle opens into a sac-
like conus arteriosus on the ventral side of the heart. The blood from the
heart is carried to all parts of the body by the arteries (arterial system).
The veins collect blood from different parts of body to the heart and form
the venous system. Special venous connection between liver and intestine
as well as the kidney and lower parts of the body are present in frogs. The
former is called hepatic portal system and the latter is called renal portal
system. The blood is composed of plasma and cells. The blood cells are
RBC (red blood cells) or erythrocytes, WBC (white blood cells) or leucocytes
and platelets. RBC’s are nucleated and contain red coloured pigment
namely haemoglobin. The lymph is different from blood. It lacks few
proteins and RBCs. The blood carries nutrients, gases and water to the
respective sites during the circulation. The circulation of blood is achieved
by the pumping action of the muscular heart.
The elimination of nitrogenous wastes is carried out by a well
developed excretory system. The excretory system consists of a pair of
kidneys, ureters, cloaca and urinary bladder. These are compact, dark
red and bean like structures situated a little posteriorly in the body cavity
on both sides of vertebral column. Each kidney is composed of several
structural and functional units called uriniferous tubules or nephrons.
Two ureters emerge from the kidneys in the male frogs. The ureters act as
urinogenital duct which opens into the cloaca. In females the ureters and
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 5 :
 STRUCTURAL ORGANISATION IN ANIMALS
83
oviduct open seperately in the cloaca. The thin-walled urinary bladder is
present ventral to the rectum which also opens in the cloaca. The frog
excretes urea and thus is a ureotelic animal. Excretory wastes are carried
by blood into the kidney where it is separated and excreted.
The system for control and coordination is highly evolved in the frog. It
includes both neural system and endocrine glands. The chemical
coordination of various organs of the body is
achieved by hormones which are secreted by the
endocrine glands. The prominent endocrine
glands found in frog are pituitary, thyroid,
parathyroid, thymus, pineal body, pancreatic
islets, adrenals and gonads. The nervous system
is organised into a central nervous system (brain
and spinal cord), a peripheral nervous system
(cranial and spinal nerves) and an autonomic
nervous 
system 
(sympathetic 
and
parasympathetic). There are ten pairs of cranial
nerves arising from the brain. Brain is enclosed
in a bony structure called brain box (cranium).
The brain is divided into fore-brain, mid-brain
and hind-brain. Forebrain includes olfactory
lobes, paired cerebral hemispheres and unpaired
diencephalon. The midbrain is characterised by
a pair of optic lobes. Hind-brain consists of
cerebellum and medulla oblongata. The medulla
oblongata passes out through the foramen
magnum and continues into spinal cord, which
is enclosed in the vertebral column.
Frog has different types of sense organs, namely
organs of touch (sensory papillae), taste (taste
buds), smell (nasal epithelium), vision (eyes) and
hearing (tympanum with internal ears). Out of
these, eyes and internal ears are well-organised
structures and the rest are cellular aggregations
around nerve endings. Eyes in a frog are a pair of
spherical structures situated in the orbit in skull.
These are simple eyes (possessing only one unit).
External ear is absent in frogs and only tympanum
can be seen externally. The ear is an organ of
hearing as well as balancing (equilibrium).
Frogs have well organised male and female
reproductive systems. Male reproductive organs
consist of a pair of yellowish ovoid testes (Figure
7.3), which are found adhered to the upper part
of kidneys by a double fold of peritoneum called
mesorchium. Vasa efferentia are 10-12 in
number that arise from testes. They enter the
kidneys on their side and open into Bidder’s
Figure 7.3 Male reproductive system
Fat
bodies
Kidney
Urino
genital duct
Cloaca
Cloacal
aperture
Testis
Adrenal
gland
Urinary
bladder
Rectum
Vasa
efferentia
Figure 7.4 Female reproductive system
Oviduct
Ovary
Ova
Ureter
Cloaca
Cloacal aperture
Urinary
bladder
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 6 :
 84
BIOLOGY
canal. Finally it communicates with the urinogenital duct that comes out
of the kidneys and opens into the cloaca. The cloaca is a small, median
chamber that is used to pass faecal matter, urine and sperms to the exterior.
The female reproductive organs include a pair of ovaries (Figure 7.4).
The ovaries are situated near kidneys and there is no functional connection
with kidneys. A pair of oviduct arising from the ovaries opens into the
cloaca separately. A mature female can lay 2500 to 3000 ova at a time.
Fertilisation is external and takes place in water. Development involves a
larval stage called tadpole. Tadpole undergoes metamorphosis to form
the adult.
Frogs are beneficial for mankind because they eat insects and protect
the crop. Frogs maintain ecological balance because these serve as an
important link of food chain and food web in the ecosystem. In some
countries the muscular legs of frog are used as food by man.
SUMMARY
Cells, tissues, organs and organ systems split up the work in a way that
ensures the survival of the body as a whole and exhibit division of labour.
A tissue is defined as group of cells along with intercellular substances
performing one or more functions in the body. Epithelia are sheet like
tissues lining the body’s surface and its cavities, ducts and tubes. Epithelia
have one free surface facing a body fluid or the outside environment.
Their cells are structurally and functionally connected at junctions.
The Indian bullfrog, Rana tigrina, is the common frog found in India.
Body is covered by skin. Mucous glands are present in the skin which is
highly vascularised and helps in respiration in water and on land. Body is
divisible into head and trunk. A muscular tongue is present, which is bilobed
at the tip and is used in capturing the prey. The alimentary canal consists
of oesophagous, stomach, intestine and rectum, which open into the cloaca.
The main digestive glands are liver and pancreas. It can respire in water
through skin and through lungs on land. Circulatory system is closed
with single circulation. RBCs are nucleated. Nervous system is organised
into central, peripheral and autonomic. The organs of urinogenital system
are kidneys and urinogenital ducts, which open into the cloaca. The male
reproductive organ is a pair of testes. The female reproductive organ is a
pair of ovaries. A female lays 2500-3000 ova at a time. The fertilisation and
development are external. The eggs hatch into tadpoles, which
metamorphose into frogs.
EXERCISES
1.
Draw a neat diagram of digestive system of frog.
2.
Mention the function of the Ureters in frog.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 1 :
 ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
71
You can very easily see the structural similarities and variations in the
external morphology of the larger living organism, both plants and
animals. Similarly, if we were to study the internal structure, one also
finds several similarities as well as differences. This chapter introduces
you to the internal structure and functional organisation of higher plants.
Study of internal structure of plants is called anatomy. Plants have cells
as the basic unit, cells are organised into tissues and in turn the tissues
are organised into organs. Different organs in a plant show differences in
their internal structure. Within angiosperms, the monocots and dicots
are also seen to be anatomically different. Internal structures also show
adaptations to diverse environments.
6.1
THE TISSUE SYSTEM
We were discussing types of tissues based on the types of cells present.
Let us now consider how tissues vary depending on their location in the
plant body. Their structure and function would also be dependent on
location. On the basis of their structure and location, there are three types
of tissue systems. These are the epidermal tissue system, the ground or
fundamental tissue system and the vascular or conducting tissue system.
6.1.1
Epidermal Tissue System
The epidermal tissue system forms the outer-most covering of the whole
plant body and comprises epidermal cells, stomata and the epidermal
appendages – the trichomes and hairs. The epidermis is the outermost
layer of the primary plant body. It is made up of elongated, compactly
ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
CHAPTER  6
6.1 The Tissue
System
6.2 Anatomy of
Dicotyledonous
and
Monocotyledonous
Plants
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 2 :
 72
BIOLOGY
The cells of epidermis bear a number of hairs. The root hairs are
unicellular elongations of the epidermal cells and help absorb water and
minerals from the soil. On the stem the epidermal hairs are called
trichomes. The trichomes in the shoot system are usually multicellular.
They may be branched  or unbranched and soft or stiff. They may even
be secretory. The trichomes help in preventing water loss due to
transpiration.
6.1.2
The Ground Tissue System
All tissues except epidermis and vascular bundles constitute the ground
tissue. It consists of simple tissues such as parenchyma, collenchyma
and sclerenchyma. Parenchymatous cells are usually present in cortex,
pericycle, pith and medullary rays, in the primary stems and roots. In
leaves, the ground tissue consists of thin-walled chloroplast containing
cells and is called mesophyll.
arranged cells, which form a continuous layer. Epidermis is usually single-
layered. Epidermal cells are parenchymatous with a small amount of
cytoplasm lining the cell wall and a large vacuole. The outside of the
epidermis is often covered with a waxy thick layer called the cuticle which
prevents the loss of water. Cuticle is absent in roots. Stomata are structures
present in the epidermis of leaves. Stomata regulate the process of
transpiration and gaseous exchange. Each stoma is composed of two bean-
shaped cells known as guard cells which enclose stomatal pore. In
grasses, the guard cells are dumb-bell shaped. The outer walls of guard
cells (away from the stomatal pore) are thin and the inner walls (towards
the stomatal pore) are highly thickened. The guard cells possess chloroplasts
and regulate the opening and closing of stomata. Sometimes, a few epidermal
cells, in the vicinity of the guard cells become specialised in their shape and
size and are known as subsidiary cells. The stomatal aperture, guard
cells and the surrounding subsidiary cells are together called stomatal
apparatus (Figure 6.1).
Figure 6.1 Diagrammatic representation: (a) stomata with bean-shaped guard cells
(b) stomata with dumb-bell shaped guard cell
Epidermal cells
Subsidiary cells
Guard cells
Stomatal
pore
Chloroplast
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 3 :
 ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
73
6.1.3
The Vascular Tissue System
The vascular system consists of complex tissues,
the phloem and the xylem.The xylem and
phloem together constitute vascular bundles
(Figure 6.2). In dicotyledonous stems,
cambium is present between phloem and
xylem. Such vascular bundles because of the
presence of cambium possess the ability to form
secondary xylem and phloem tissues, and hence
are called open vascular bundles. In the
monocotyledons, the vascular bundles have no
cambium present in them. Hence, since they do
not form secondary tissues they are referred to
as closed. When xylem and phloem within a
vascular bundle are arranged in an alternate
manner along the  different radii, the
arrangement is called radial such as in roots.
In conjoint type of vascular bundles, the xylem
and phloem are jointly situated  along the same
radius of vascular bundles. Such vascular
bundles are common in stems and leaves. The
conjoint vascular bundles usually have the
phloem located only on the outer side of xylem.
6.2
ANATOMY OF DICOTYLEDONOUS AND
MONOCOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS
For a better understanding of tissue
organisation of roots, stems and leaves, it is
convenient to study the transverse sections of
the mature zones of these organs.
6.2.1
Dicotyledonous Root
Look at Figure 6.3 (a), it shows the transverse
section of the sunflower root. The internal tissue
organisation is as follows:
The outermost layer is epiblema. Many of
the cells of epiblema protrude in the form of
unicellular root hairs. The cortex consists of
several layers of thin-walled parenchyma cells
Figure 6.2
Various types of vascular bundles :
(a) radial  (b) conjoint closed
(c) conjoint open
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 4 :
 74
BIOLOGY
with intercellular spaces. The innermost
layer of the cortex is called endodermis.
It comprises a single layer of barrel-
shaped cells without any intercellular
spaces. The tangential as well as radial
walls of the endodermal cells have a
deposition of water-impermeable, waxy
material suberin in the form of casparian
strips. Next to endodermis lies a few layers
of thick-walled parenchyomatous cells
referred to as pericycle.  Initiation of lateral
roots and vascular cambium during the
secondary growth takes place in these
cells. The pith is small or inconspicuous.
The parenchymatous cells which lie
between the xylem and the phloem are
called conjuctive tissue. There are
usually two to four xylem and phloem
patches. Later, a cambium ring develops
between the xylem and phloem. All tissues
on the innerside of the endodermis such
as pericycle, vascular bundles and pith
constitute the stele.
6.2.2
Monocotyledonous Root
The anatomy of the monocot root is similar
to the dicot root in many respects (Figure
6.3 b). It has epidermis, cortex, endodermis,
pericycle, vascular bundles and pith. As
compared to the dicot root which have fewer
xylem bundles, there are usually more
than six (polyarch) xylem bundles in the
monocot root. Pith is large and well
developed. Monocotyledonous roots do not
undergo any secondary growth.
6.2.3
Dicotyledonous Stem
The transverse section of a typical young
dicotyledonous stem shows that the epidermis
is the outermost protective layer of the stem
Root hair
Epidermis
Cortex
Endodermis
Protoxylem
Metaxylem
Pith
Phloem
(a)
Pericycle
Root hair
Cortex
Endodermis
Phloem
Protoxylem
Pith
Metaxylem
(b)
Epidermis
Pericycle
Figure 6.3
T.S. : (a) Dicot root (Primary)
(b) Monocot root
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 5 :
 ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
75
(Figure 6.4 a). Covered with a thin layer of cuticle, it may bear trichomes and
a few stomata. The cells arranged in multiple layers between epidermis and
pericycle constitute the cortex. It consists of three sub-zones. The outer
hypodermis, consists of a few layers of collenchymatous cells just below the
epidermis, which provide mechanical strength to the young stem. Cortical
layers below hypodermis consist of rounded thin walled parenchymatous
cells with conspicuous intercellular spaces. The innermost layer of the cortex
is called the endodermis. The cells of the endodermis are rich in starch
grains and the layer is also referred to as the starch sheath. Pericycle is
Figure 6.4  T.S. of stem :  (a) Dicot  (b) Monocot
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 6 :
 76
BIOLOGY
Figure 6.5  T.S. of leaf : (a) Dicot  (b) Monocot
present on the inner side of the endodermis and above the phloem in the
form of semi-lunar patches of sclerenchyma. In between the vascular bundles
there are a few layers of radially placed parenchymatous cells, which constitute
medullary rays. A large number of vascular bundles are arranged in a ring ;
the ‘ring’ arrangement of vascular bundles is a characteristic of dicot stem.
Each vascular bundle is conjoint, open, and with endarch protoxylem. A
large number of rounded, parenchymatous cells with large intercellular
spaces which occupy the central portion of the stem constitute the pith.
6.2.4
Monocotyledonous Stem
The monocot stem has a sclerenchymatous hypodermis, a large number
of scattered vascular bundles, each surrounded by a sclerenchymatous
bundle sheath, and a large, conspicuous
parenchymatous ground tissue (Figure
6.4 b). Vascular bundles are conjoint  and
closed. Peripheral vascular bundles are
generally smaller than the centrally
located ones. The phloem parenchyma is
absent, and water-containing cavities are
present within the vascular bundles.
6.2.5
Dorsiventral
(Dicotyledonous) Leaf
The vertical section of a dorsiventral leaf
through the lamina shows three main
parts, namely, epidermis, mesophyll and
vascular system. The epidermis which
covers both the upper surface (adaxial
epidermis) and lower  surface (abaxial
epidermis) of the leaf has a conspicuous
cuticle. The abaxial epidermis generally
bears more stomata than the adaxial
epidermis. The latter may even lack
stomata. The tissue between the upper
and the lower epidermis is called the
mesophyll. Mesophyll, which possesses
chloroplasts 
and 
carry 
out
photosynthesis, 
is made up of
parenchyma. It has two types of cells – the
palisade parenchyma and the spongy
parenchyma. The adaxially placed
palisade parenchyma is made up of
elongated cells, which are arranged
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 7 :
 ANATOMY OF FLOWERING PLANTS
77
vertically and parallel to each other. The oval or round and loosely arranged
spongy parenchyma is situated below the palisade cells and extends to
the lower epidermis. There are numerous large spaces and air cavities
between these cells.  Vascular system includes vascular bundles, which
can be seen in the veins and the midrib. The size of the vascular bundles
are dependent on the size of the veins. The veins vary in thickness in the
reticulate venation of the dicot leaves. The vascular bundles are
surrounded by a layer of thick walled bundle sheath cells. Look at
Figure 6.5 (a) and find the position of xylem in the vascular bundle.
6.2.6
Isobilateral (Monocotyledonous) Leaf
The anatomy of isobilateral leaf is similar to that of the dorsiventral leaf in
many ways. It shows the following characteristic differences. In an
isobilateral leaf, the stomata are present on both the surfaces of the
epidermis; and the mesophyll is not differentiated into palisade and spongy
parenchyma (Figure 6.5 b).
In grasses, certain adaxial epidermal cells along the veins modify
themselves into large, empty, colourless cells. These are called bulliform
cells. When the bulliform cells in the leaves have absorbed water and are
turgid, the leaf surface is exposed. When they are flaccid due to water
stress, they make the leaves curl inwards to minimise water loss.
The parallel venation in monocot leaves is reflected in the near similar
sizes of vascular bundles (except in main veins) as seen in vertical sections
of the leaves.
SUMMARY
Anatomically, a plant is made of different kinds of tissues. The plant tissues are
broadly classified into meristematic (apical, lateral and intercalary) and permanent
(simple and complex). Assimilation of food and its storage, transportation of water,
minerals and photosynthates, and mechanical support are the main functions
of tissues. There are three types of tissue  systems – epidermal, ground and
vascular. The epidermal tissue systems are made of epidermal cells, stomata
and the epidermal appendages. The ground tissue system forms the main bulk
of the plant. It is divided into three zones – cortex, pericycle and pith. The vascular
tissue system is formed by the xylem and phloem. On the basis of presence of
cambium, location of xylem and phloem, the vascular bundles are of different
types. The vascular bundles form the conducting tissue and translocate water,
minerals and food material.
Monocotyledonous and dicotyledonous plants show marked variation in their
internal structures. They differ in type, number and location of vascular bundles.
The secondary growth occurs in most of the dicotyledonous roots and stems.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 8 :
 78
BIOLOGY
EXERCISES
1.
Draw illustrations to bring out the anatomical difference between
(a) Monocot root and Dicot root
(b) Monocot stem and Dicot stem
2.
Cut a transverse section of young stem of a plant from your school garden and
observe it under the microscope. How would you ascertain whether it is a
monocot stem or a dicot stem? Give reasons.
3.
The transverse section of a plant material shows the following anatomical
features - (a) the vascular bundles are conjoint, scattered and surrounded by a
sclerenchymatous bundle sheaths. (b) phloem parenchyma is absent. What
will you identify it as?
4.
What is stomatal apparatus? Explain the structure of stomata with a labelled
diagram.
5.
Name the three basic tissue systems in the flowering plants. Give the tissue
names under each system.
6.
How is the study of plant anatomy useful to us?
7.
Describe the internal structure of a dorsiventral leaf with the help of labelled
diagrams.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 1 :
 UNIT 3
Biology is the study of living organisms. The detailed description of
their form and appearance only brought out their diversity. It is the
cell theory that emphasised the unity underlying this diversity of forms,
i.e., the cellular organisation of all life forms. A description of cell
structure and cell growth by division is given in the chapters comprising
this unit. Cell theory also created a sense of mystery around living
phenomena, i.e., physiological and behavioural processes. This mystery
was the requirement of integrity of cellular organisation for living
phenomena to be demonstrated or observed. In studying and
understanding the physiological and behavioural processes, one can
take a physico-chemical approach and use cell-free systems to
investigate. This approach enables us to describe the various processes
in molecular terms. The approach is established by analysis of living
tissues for elements and compounds. It will tell us what types of organic
compounds are present in living organisms. In the next stage, one can
ask the question: What are these compounds doing inside a cell? And,
in what way they carry out gross physiological processes like digestion,
excretion, memory, defense, recognition, etc. In other words we answer
the question, what is the molecular basis of all physiological processes?
It can also explain the abnormal processes that occur during any
diseased condition. This physico-chemical approach to study and
understand living organisms is called ‘Reductionist Biology’. The
concepts and techniques of physics and chemistry are applied to
understand biology. In Chapter 9 of this unit, a brief description of
biomolecules is provided.
CELL: STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS
Chapter 8
Cell: The Unit of Life
Chapter 9
Biomolecules
Chapter 10
Cell Cycle and
Cell Division
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 2 :
 G.N. RAMACHANDRAN, an outstanding figure in the field of protein
structure, was the founder of the ‘Madras school’ of
conformational analysis of biopolymers. His discovery of the triple
helical structure of collagen published in Nature in 1954 and his
analysis of the allowed conformations of proteins through the
use of the ‘Ramachandran plot’ rank among the most outstanding
contributions in structural biology. He was born on October 8,
1922, in a small town, not far from Cochin on the southwestern
coast of India. His father was a professor of mathematics at a
local college and thus had considerable influence in shaping
Ramachandran’s interest in mathematics. After completing his
school years, Ramachandran graduated in 1942 as the top-
ranking student in the B.Sc. (Honors) Physics course of the
University of Madras. He received a Ph.D. from Cambridge
University in 1949. While at Cambridge, Ramachandran met
Linus Pauling and was deeply influenced by his publications on
models of the α-helix and β-sheet structures that directed his
attention to solving the structure of collagen. He passed away at
the age of 78, on April 7, 2001.
G.N. Ramachandran
(1922 – 2001)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 3 :
 When you look around, you see both living and non-living things. You
must have wondered and asked yourself – ‘what is it that makes an
organism living, or what is it that an inanimate thing does not have which
a living thing has’ ? The answer to this is the presence of the basic unit of
life – the cell in all living organisms.
All organisms are composed of cells. Some are composed of a single
cell and are called unicellular organisms while others, like us, composed
of many cells, are called multicellular organisms.
8.1
WHAT IS A CELL?
Unicellular organisms are capable of (i) independent existence and
(ii) performing the essential functions of life. Anything less than a complete
structure of a cell does not ensure independent living. Hence, cell is the
fundamental structural and functional unit of all living organisms.
Anton Von Leeuwenhoek first saw and described a live cell. Robert
Brown later discovered the nucleus. The invention of the microscope and
its improvement leading to the electron microscope revealed all the
structural details of the cell.
8.2
CELL THEORY
In 1838, Matthias Schleiden, a German botanist, examined a large number
of plants and observed that all plants are composed of different kinds of
cells which form the tissues of the plant. At about the same time, Theodore
CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE
CHAPTER  8
8.1
What is a Cell?
8.2
Cell Theory
8.3
An Overview of
Cell
8.4
Prokaryotic Cells
8.5
Eukaryotic Cells
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 4 :
 88
BIOLOGY
Schwann (1839), a British Zoologist, studied different types of animal cells
and reported that cells had a thin outer layer which is today known as the
‘plasma membrane’. He also concluded, based on his studies on plant
tissues, that the presence of cell wall is a unique character of the plant
cells. On the basis of this, Schwann proposed the hypothesis that the bodies
of animals and plants are composed of cells and products of cells.
Schleiden and Schwann together formulated the cell theory. This theory
however, did not explain as to how new cells were formed. Rudolf Virchow
(1855) first explained that cells divided and new cells are formed from
pre-existing cells (Omnis cellula-e cellula). He modified the hypothesis of
Schleiden and Schwann to give the cell theory a final shape. Cell theory
as understood today is:
(i)
all living organisms are composed of cells and products of cells.
(ii) all cells arise from pre-existing cells.
8.3
AN OVERVIEW OF CELL
You have earlier observed cells in an onion peel and/or human cheek
cells under the microscope. Let us recollect their structure. The onion cell
which is a typical plant cell, has a distinct cell wall as its outer boundary
and just within it is the cell membrane. The cells of the human cheek
have an outer membrane as the delimiting structure of the cell. Inside
each cell is a dense membrane bound structure called nucleus. This
nucleus contains the chromosomes which in turn contain the genetic
material, DNA. Cells that have membrane bound nuclei are called
eukaryotic whereas cells that lack a membrane bound nucleus are
prokaryotic. In both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, a semi-fluid matrix
called cytoplasm occupies the volume of the cell. The cytoplasm is the
main arena of cellular activities in both the plant and animal cells. Various
chemical reactions occur in it to keep the cell in the ‘living state’.
Besides the nucleus, the eukaryotic cells have other membrane bound
distinct structures called organelles like the endoplasmic reticulum (ER),
the golgi complex, lysosomes, mitochondria, microbodies and vacuoles.
The prokaryotic cells lack such membrane bound organelles.
Ribosomes are non-membrane bound organelles found in all cells –
both eukaryotic as well as prokaryotic. Within the cell, ribosomes are
found not only in the cytoplasm but also within the two organelles –
chloroplasts (in plants) and mitochondria and on rough ER.
Animal cells contain another non-membrane bound organelle called
centrosome which helps in cell division.
Cells differ greatly in size, shape and activities (Figure 8.1). For example,
Mycoplasmas, the smallest cells, are only 0.3 µm in length while bacteria
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 5 :
 CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE
89
Red blood cells
(round and biconcave)
White blood cells
(Branched and long)
Columnar epithelial cells
(long and narrow)
(amoeboid)
Nerve cell
Mesophyll cells
(round and oval)
A tracheid
(elongated)
Figure 8.1 Diagram showing different shapes of the cells
could be 3 to 5 µm. The largest isolated single cell is the egg of an ostrich.
Among multicellular organisms, human red blood cells are about 7.0
µm in diameter. Nerve cells are some of the longest cells. Cells also vary
greatly in their shape. They may be disc-like, polygonal, columnar, cuboid,
thread like, or even irregular. The shape of the cell may vary with the
function they perform.
8.4
PROKARYOTIC CELLS
The prokaryotic cells are represented by bacteria, blue-green algae,
mycoplasma and PPLO (Pleuro Pneumonia Like Organisms). They are
generally smaller and multiply more rapidly than the eukaryotic cells
(Figure 8.2). They may vary greatly in shape and size. The four basic
shapes of bacteria are bacillus (rod like), coccus (spherical), vibrio (comma
shaped) and spirillum (spiral).
The organisation of the prokaryotic cell is fundamentally similar even
though prokaryotes exhibit a wide variety of shapes and functions. All
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 6 :
 90
BIOLOGY
prokaryotes have a cell wall surrounding the
cell membrane except in mycoplasma. The fluid
matrix filling the cell is the cytoplasm. There is
no well-defined nucleus. The genetic material is
basically naked, not enveloped by a nuclear
membrane. In addition to the genomic DNA (the
single chromosome/circular DNA), many
bacteria have small circular DNA outside the
genomic DNA. These smaller DNA are called
plasmids. The plasmid DNA confers certain
unique phenotypic characters to such bacteria.
One such character is resistance to antibiotics.
In higher classes you will learn that this plasmid
DNA is used to monitor bacterial transformation
with foreign DNA. Nuclear membrane is found
in eukaryotes. No organelles, like the ones in
eukaryotes, are found in prokaryotic cells except
for ribosomes. Prokaryotes have something
unique in the form of inclusions. A specialised
differentiated form of cell membrane called mesosome is the characteristic
of prokaryotes. They are essentially infoldings of cell membrane.
8.4.1
Cell Envelope and its Modifications
Most prokaryotic cells, particularly the bacterial cells, have a chemically
complex cell envelope. The cell envelope consists of a tightly bound three
layered structure i.e., the outermost glycocalyx followed by the cell wall and
then the plasma membrane. Although each layer of the envelope performs
distinct function, they act together as a single protective unit. Bacteria can
be classified into two groups on the basis of the differences in the cell envelopes
and the manner in which they respond to the staining procedure developed
by Gram viz., those that take up the gram stain are Gram positive and the
others that do not are called Gram negative bacteria.
Glycocalyx differs in composition and thickness among different
bacteria. It could be a loose sheath called the slime layer in some, while
in others it may be thick and tough, called the capsule. The cell wall
determines the shape of the cell and provides a strong structural support
to prevent the bacterium from bursting or collapsing.
The plasma membrane is selectively permeable in nature and interacts
with the outside world. This membrane is similar structurally to that of
the eukaryotes.
A special membranous structure is the mesosome which is formed
by the extensions of plasma membrane into the cell. These extensions are
in the form of vesicles, tubules and lamellae. They help in cell wall
Typical bacteria
(1-2
m)

PPLO
(about 0.1
m)

Viruses
(0.02-0.2
m)

A typical eukaryotic cell
(10-20
m)

Figure 8.2 Diagram showing comparison of
eukaryotic 
cell 
with 
other
organisms
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 7 :
 CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE
91
formation, DNA replication and distribution to daughter cells. They also
help in respiration, secretion processes, to increase the surface area of
the plasma membrane and enzymatic content. In some prokaryotes like
cyanobacteria, there are other membranous extensions into the cytoplasm
called chromatophores which contain pigments.
Bacterial cells may be motile or non-motile. If motile, they have thin
filamentous extensions from their cell wall called flagella. Bacteria show a
range in the number and arrangement of flagella. Bacterial flagellum is
composed of three parts – filament, hook and basal body. The filament
is the longest portion and extends from the cell surface to the outside.
Besides flagella, Pili and Fimbriae are also surface structures of the
bacteria but do not play a role in motility. The pili are elongated tubular
structures made of a special protein. The fimbriae are small bristle like
fibres sprouting out of the cell. In some bacteria, they are known to help
attach the bacteria  to rocks in streams and also to the host tissues.
8.4.2
Ribosomes and Inclusion Bodies
In prokaryotes, ribosomes are associated with the plasma membrane of
the cell. They are about 15 nm by 20 nm in size and are made of two
subunits - 50S and 30S units which when present together form 70S
prokaryotic ribosomes. Ribosomes are the site of protein synthesis. Several
ribosomes may attach to a single mRNA and form a chain called
polyribosomes or polysome. The ribosomes of a polysome translate the
mRNA into proteins.
Inclusion bodies: Reserve material in prokaryotic cells are stored in
the cytoplasm in the form of inclusion bodies. These are not bound by
any membrane system and lie free in the cytoplasm, e.g., phosphate
granules, cyanophycean granules and glycogen granules. Gas vacuoles
are found in blue green and purple and green photosynthetic bacteria.
8.5
EUKARYOTIC CELLS
The eukaryotes include all the protists, plants, animals and fungi. In
eukaryotic cells there is an extensive compartmentalisation of cytoplasm
through the presence of membrane bound organelles. Eukaryotic cells
possess an organised nucleus with a nuclear envelope. In addition,
eukaryotic cells have a variety of complex locomotory and cytoskeletal
structures. Their genetic material is organised into chromosomes.
All eukaryotic cells are not identical. Plant and animal cells are different
as the former possess cell walls, plastids and a large central vacuole which
are absent in animal cells. On the other hand, animal cells have centrioles
which are absent in almost all plant cells (Figure 8.3).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 8 :
 92
BIOLOGY
Rough endoplasmic
reticulum
Lysosome
Smooth
endoplasmic
reticulum
Plasmodesmata
Microtubule
Nucleus
Nucleolus
Golgi
apparatus
Nuclear
envelope
Vacuole
Middle lamella
Plasma
membrane
Cell wall
Mitochondrion
Ribosomes
Chloroplast
Cytoplasm
Peroxisome
Figure 8.3 Diagram showing : (a) Plant cell  (b) Animal cell
Golgi
apparatus
Smooth
endoplasmic
reticulum
Nuclear
envelope
Nucleolus
Nucleus
Microvilli
Plasma
membrane
Centriole
Peroxiome
Lysosome
Ribosomes
Mitochondrion
Rough
endoplasmic
reticulum
Cytoplasm
(a)
(b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 9 :
 CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE
93
Cholesterol
Sugar
Peripheral
 Protein
Phospholipid
bilayer
Let us now look at individual cell organelles to understand their
structure and functions.
8.5.1 Cell Membrane
The detailed structure of the membrane was studied only after the advent
of the electron microscope in the 1950s. Meanwhile, chemical studies on
the cell membrane, especially in human red blood cells (RBCs), enabled
the scientists to deduce the possible structure of plasma membrane.
These studies showed that the cell membrane is mainly composed of
lipids and proteins. The major lipids are phospholipids that are arranged
in a bilayer. Also, the lipids are arranged within the membrane with the
polar head towards the outer sides and the hydrophobic tails towards
the inner part.This ensures that the nonpolar tail of saturated
hydrocarbons is protected from the aqueous environment (Figure 8.4).
In addition to phospholipids membrane also contains cholesterol.
Later, biochemical investigation clearly revealed that the cell membranes
also possess protein and carbohydrate. The ratio of protein and lipid varies
considerably in different cell types. In human beings, the  membrane of the
erythrocyte has approximately 52 per cent protein and 40 per cent lipids.
Depending on the ease of extraction, membrane proteins can be
classified as integral and peripheral. Peripheral proteins lie on the surface
of membrane while the integral proteins are partially or totally buried in
the membrane.
Figure 8.4 Fluid mosaic model of plasma membrane
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 10 :
 94
BIOLOGY
An improved model of  the structure of cell membrane was proposed
by Singer and Nicolson (1972) widely accepted as fluid mosaic model
(Figure 8.4). According to this, the quasi-fluid nature of lipid enables
lateral movement of proteins within the overall bilayer. This ability to move
within the membrane is measured as its fluidity.
The fluid nature of the membrane is also important from the point of
view of functions like cell growth, formation of intercellular junctions,
secretion, endocytosis, cell division etc.
One of the most important functions of the plasma membrane is the
transport of the molecules across it. The membrane is selectively permeable
to some molecules present on either side of it. Many molecules can move
briefly across the membrane without any requirement of energy and this
is called the passive transport. Neutral solutes may move across the
membrane by the process of simple diffusion along the concentration
gradient, i.e., from higher concentration to the lower. Water may also move
across this membrane from higher to lower concentration. Movement of
water by diffusion is called osmosis. As the polar molecules cannot pass
through the nonpolar lipid bilayer, they require a carrier protein of the
membrane to facilitate their transport across the membrane. A few ions
or molecules are transported across the membrane against their
concentration gradient, i.e., from lower to the higher concentration. Such
a transport is an energy dependent process, in which ATP is utilised and
is called active transport, e.g., Na+/K+ Pump.
8.5.2
Cell Wall
As you may recall, a non-living rigid structure called the cell wall forms
an outer covering for the plasma membrane of fungi and plants. Cell wall
not only gives shape to the cell and protects the cell from mechanical
damage and infection, it also helps in cell-to-cell interaction and provides
barrier to undesirable macromolecules. Algae have cell wall, made of
cellulose, galactans, mannans and minerals like calcium carbonate, while
in other plants it consists of cellulose, hemicellulose, pectins and proteins.
The cell wall of a young plant cell, the primary wall is capable of growth,
which gradually diminishes as the cell matures and the secondary wall is
formed on the inner (towards membrane) side of the cell.
The middle lamella is a layer mainly of calcium pectate which holds
or glues the different neighbouring cells together. The cell wall and middle
lamellae may be traversed by plasmodesmata which connect the cytoplasm
of neighbouring cells.
8.5.3
Endomembrane System
While each of the membranous organelles is distinct in terms of its
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 11 :
 CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE
95
Nucleus
Nuclear pore
Rough
Ribosome
endoplasmic
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Smooth
reticulum
structure and function, many of these are
considered together as an endomembrane system
because their functions are coordinated. The
endomembrane system include endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), golgi complex, lysosomes and
vacuoles. Since the functions of the mitochondria,
chloroplast and peroxisomes are not coordinated
with the above components, these are not
considered as part of the endomembrane system.
8.5.3.1
8.5.3.1
8.5.3.1
8.5.3.1
8.5.3.1
The Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)
The Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)
The Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)
The Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)
The Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER)
Electron microscopic studies of eukaryotic cells
reveal the presence of a network or reticulum of
tiny tubular structures scattered in the cytoplasm
that is called the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
(Figure 8.5).  Hence, ER divides the intracellular
space into two distinct compartments, i.e., luminal
(inside ER) and extra luminal (cytoplasm)
compartments.
The ER often shows ribosomes attached to
their outer surface. The endoplasmic reticulun
bearing ribosomes on their surface is called rough
endoplasmic reticulum (RER). In the absence of
ribosomes they appear smooth and are called
smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER).
RER is frequently observed in the cells actively
involved in protein synthesis and secretion. They
are extensive and continuous with the outer
membrane of the nucleus.
The smooth endoplasmic reticulum is the major
site for synthesis of lipid. In animal cells lipid-like
steroidal hormones are synthesised in SER.
8.5.3.2
8.5.3.2
8.5.3.2
8.5.3.2
8.5.3.2 Golgi apparatus
Golgi apparatus
Golgi apparatus
Golgi apparatus
Golgi apparatus
Camillo Golgi (1898) first observed densely stained
reticular structures near the nucleus. These were
later named Golgi bodies after him. They consist
of many flat, disc-shaped sacs or cisternae of
0.5µm to 1.0µm diameter (Figure 8.6). These are
stacked parallel to each other. Varied number of
cisternae are present in a Golgi complex. The Golgi
cisternae are concentrically arranged near the
nucleus with distinct convex cis or the forming
Figure 8.5 Endoplasmic reticulum
Cisternae
Figure 8.6  Golgi apparatus
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 12 :
 96
BIOLOGY
face 
and 
concave 
trans 
or 
the 
maturing 
face.
The cis and the trans faces of the organelle are entirely different, but
interconnected.
The golgi apparatus principally performs the function of packaging
materials, to be delivered either to the intra-cellular targets or secreted
outside the cell. Materials to be packaged in the form of vesicles from
the ER fuse with the cis face of the golgi apparatus and move towards
the maturing face. This explains, why the golgi apparatus remains in
close association with the endoplasmic reticulum. A number of proteins
synthesised by ribosomes on the endoplasmic reticulum are modified
in the cisternae of the golgi apparatus before they are released from its
trans face. Golgi apparatus is the important site of formation of
glycoproteins and glycolipids.
8.5.3.3
8.5.3.3
8.5.3.3
8.5.3.3
8.5.3.3
Lysosomes
Lysosomes
Lysosomes
Lysosomes
Lysosomes
These are membrane bound vesicular structures formed by the process
of packaging in the golgi apparatus. The isolated lysosomal vesicles
have been found to be very rich in almost all types of hydrolytic
enzymes (hydrolases – lipases, proteases, carbohydrases) optimally
active at the acidic pH. These enzymes are capable of digesting
carbohydrates, proteins, lipids and nucleic acids.
8.5.3.4
8.5.3.4
8.5.3.4
8.5.3.4
8.5.3.4 Vacuoles
Vacuoles
Vacuoles
Vacuoles
Vacuoles
The vacuole is the membrane-bound space found in the cytoplasm. It contains
water, sap, excretory product and other materials not useful for the cell. The
vacuole is bound by a single membrane called tonoplast. In plant cells the
vacuoles can occupy up to 90 per cent of the volume of the cell.
In plants, the tonoplast facilitates the transport of a number of ions
and other materials against concentration gradients into the vacuole, hence
their concentration is significantly higher in the vacuole than in the
cytoplasm.
In Amoeba the contractile vacuole is important for osmoregulation
and excretion. In many cells, as in protists, food vacuoles are formed by
engulfing the food particles.
8.5.4 Mitochondria
Mitochondria (sing.: mitochondrion), unless specifically stained, are not
easily visible under the microscope. The number of mitochondria per cell
is variable depending on the physiological activity of the cells. In terms of
shape and size also, considerable degree of variability is observed. Typically
it is sausage-shaped or cylindrical having a diameter of 0.2-1.0µm (average
0.5µm) and length 1.0-4.1µm. Each mitochondrion is a double
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 13 :
 CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE
97
membrane-bound structure with the outer membrane and the inner
membrane dividing its lumen distinctly into two aqueous compartments,
i.e., the outer compartment and the inner compartment. The inner
compartment is filled with a dense homogeneous substance called the
matrix. The outer membrane forms the continuous limiting boundary of
the organelle. The inner membrane forms a number of infoldings called
the cristae (sing.: crista) towards the matrix (Figure 8.7). The cristae
increase the surface area. The two membranes have their own specific
enzymes associated with the mitochondrial function. Mitochondria are
the sites of aerobic respiration. They produce cellular energy in the form
of ATP, hence they are called ‘power houses’ of the cell. The matrix also
possesses single circular DNA molecule, a few RNA molecules, ribosomes
(70S) and the components required for the synthesis of proteins. The
mitochondria divide by fission.
8.5.5
Plastids
Plastids are found in all plant cells and in euglenoides. These are easily
observed under the microscope as they are large. They bear some specific
pigments, thus imparting specific colours to the plants. Based on the
type of pigments plastids can be classified into chloroplasts,
chromoplasts and leucoplasts.
The chloroplasts contain chlorophyll and carotenoid pigments which
are responsible for trapping light energy essential for photosynthesis. In
the chromoplasts fat soluble carotenoid pigments like carotene,
xanthophylls and others are present. This gives the part of the plant a
yellow, orange or red colour. The leucoplasts are the colourless plastids
of varied shapes and sizes with stored nutrients: Amyloplasts store
carbohydrates (starch), e.g., potato; elaioplasts store oils and fats whereas
Outer
membrane
Inner
membrane
Matrix
Crista
Figure 8.7  Structure of mitochondrion (Longitudinal section)
Inter-membrane
space
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 14 :
 98
BIOLOGY
the aleuroplasts store proteins.
Majority of the chloroplasts of the green
plants are found in the mesophyll cells of
the leaves. These are lens-shaped, oval,
spherical, discoid or even ribbon-like
organelles having variable length (5-10µm)
and width (2-4µm). Their number varies
from 1 per cell of the Chlamydomonas, a
green alga to 20-40 per cell in the mesophyll.
Like mitochondria, the chloroplasts are
also double membrane bound. Of the two,
the  inner chloroplast membrane is relatively
less permeable. The space limited by the
inner membrane of the chloroplast is called the stroma. A number of organised
flattened membranous sacs called the thylakoids, are present in the stroma
(Figure 8.8). Thylakoids are arranged in stacks  like the piles of coins called
grana (singular: granum) or the intergranal thylakoids. In addition, there are
flat membranous tubules called the stroma lamellae connecting the thylakoids
of the different grana. The membrane of the thylakoids enclose a space called
a lumen. The stroma of the chloroplast contains enzymes required for the
synthesis of carbohydrates and proteins. It also contains small, double-
stranded circular DNA molecules and ribosomes. Chlorophyll pigments are
present in the thylakoids. The ribosomes of the chloroplasts are smaller (70S)
than the cytoplasmic ribosomes (80S).
8.5.6
Ribosomes
Ribosomes are the granular structures first observed under the electron
microscope as dense particles by George Palade (1953). They are
composed of ribonucleic acid (RNA) and proteins and
are not surrounded by any membrane.
The eukaryotic ribosomes are 80S while the
prokaryotic ribosomes are 70S. Each ribosome has two
subunits, larger and smaller subunits (Fig 8.9). The two
subunits of 80S ribosomes are 60S and 40S while that
of 70S ribosomes are 50S and 30S. Here ‘S’ (Svedberg’s
Unit) stands for the sedimentation coefficient; it is
indirectly a measure of density and size. Both 70S and
80S ribosomes are composed of two subunits.
Figure 8.8  Sectional view of chloroplast
Figure 8.9 Ribosome
8.5.7
Cytoskeleton
An elaborate network of filamentous proteinaceous structures consisting
of microtubules, microfilaments and intermediate filaments present in
the cytoplasm is collectively referred to as the cytoskeleton. The
cytoskeleton  in a cell are involved in many functions such as mechanical
support, motility, maintenance of the shape of the cell.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 15 :
 CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE
99
8.5.8 Cilia and Flagella
Cilia (sing.: cilium) and flagella (sing.: flagellum) are hair-like outgrowths
of the cell membrane.  Cilia are small structures which work like oars,
causing the movement of either the cell or the surrounding fluid. Flagella
are comparatively longer and responsible for cell movement. The
prokaryotic bacteria also possess flagella but these are structurally
different from that of the eukaryotic flagella.
The electron microscopic study of a cilium or the flagellum show that
they are covered with plasma membrane. Their core called the axoneme,
possesses a number of microtubules running parallel to the long axis.
The axoneme usually has nine doublets of radially arranged peripheral
microtubules, and a pair of centrally located microtubules. Such an
arrangement of axonemal microtubules is referred to as the 9+2 array
(Figure 8.10). The central tubules are connected by bridges and is also
enclosed by a central sheath, which is connected to one of the tubules of
each peripheral doublets by a radial spoke. Thus, there are nine radial
spokes. The peripheral doublets are also interconnected by linkers. Both
the cilium and flagellum emerge from centriole-like structure called the
basal bodies.
8.5.9 Centrosome and Centrioles
Centrosome is an organelle usually containing two cylindrical structures
called centrioles. They are surrounded by amorphous pericentriolar
materials. Both the centrioles in a centrosome lie perpendicular to each
other in which each has an organisation like the cartwheel. They are
Plasma
membrane
Peripheral
microtubules
(doublets)
Interdoublet
bridge
Central
microtuble
Radial
spoke
Central
sheath
Figure 8.10 Section of cilia/flagella showing different parts : (a) Electron micrograph
(b) Diagrammatic representation of internal structure
(a)
(b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 16 :
 100
BIOLOGY
made up of nine evenly spaced peripheral fibrils of tubulin protein. Each
of the peripheral fibril is a triplet.The adjacent triplets are also linked.
The central part of the proximal region of the centriole is also proteinaceous
and called the hub, which is connected with tubules of the peripheral
triplets by radial spokes made of protein. The centrioles form the basal
body of cilia or flagella, and spindle fibres that give rise to spindle
apparatus during cell division in animal cells.
8.5.10 Nucleus
Nucleus as a cell organelle was first described by Robert Brown as early
as 1831. Later the material of the nucleus stained by the basic dyes was
given the name chromatin by Flemming.
The interphase nucleus (nucleus of a
cell when it is not dividing) has highly
extended and elaborate nucleoprotein
fibres called chromatin, nuclear matrix
and one or more spherical bodies called
nucleoli (sing.: nucleolus) (Figure 8.11).
Electron microscopy has revealed that the
nuclear envelope, which consists of two
parallel membranes with a space between
(10 to 50 nm) called the perinuclear
space, forms a barrier between the
materials present inside the nucleus and
that of the cytoplasm. The outer
membrane usually remains continuous
with the endoplasmic reticulum and also
bears ribosomes on it. At a number of
places the nuclear envelope is interrupted by minute pores, which are
formed by the fusion of its two membranes. These nuclear pores are the
passages through which movement of RNA and protein molecules takes
place in both directions between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Normally,
there is only one nucleus per cell, variations in the number of nuclei are
also frequently observed. Can you recollect names of organisms that
have more than one nucleus per cell? Some mature cells even lack
nucleus, e.g., erythrocytes of many mammals and sieve tube cells of
vascular plants. Would you consider these cells as ‘living’?
The nuclear matrix or the nucleoplasm contains nucleolus and
chromatin. The nucleoli are spherical structures present in the
nucleoplasm. The content of nucleolus is continuous with the rest of the
nucleoplasm as it is not a membrane bound structure. It is a site for
active ribosomal RNA synthesis. Larger and more numerous nucleoli are
present in cells actively carrying out protein synthesis.
Nucleoplasm
Nucleolus
Nuclear pore
Nuclear
membrane
Figure 8.11  Structure of nucleus
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 17 :
 CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE
101
Kinetochore
Figure 8.12 Chromosome with
kinetochore
Figure 8.13  Types of chromosomes based on the position of centromere
You may recall that the interphase nucleus has a loose
and indistinct network of nucleoprotein fibres called
chromatin. But during different stages of cell division, cells
show structured chromosomes in place of the nucleus.
Chromatin contains DNA and some basic proteins called
histones, some non-histone proteins and also RNA. A
single human cell has approximately two metre long
thread of DNA distributed among its forty six (twenty three
pairs) chromosomes. You will study the details of DNA
packaging in the form of a chromosome in class XII.
Every chromosome (visible only in dividing cells)
essentially has a primary constriction or the centromere
on the sides of which disc shaped structures called
kinetochores are present (Figure 8.12). Centromere holds
two chromatids of a chromosome. Based on the position
of the centromere, the chromosomes can be classified into
four types (Figure 8.13). The metacentric chromosome
has middle centromere forming two equal arms of the
chromosome. The sub-metacentric chromosome has
centromere slightly away from the middle of the
chromosome resulting into one shorter arm and one
longer arm. In case of acrocentric chromosome the
centromere is situated close to its end forming one
extremely short and one very long arm, whereas the
telocentric chromosome has a terminal centromere.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 18 :
 102
BIOLOGY
Sometimes a few chromosomes have non-staining secondary
constrictions at a constant location. This gives the appearance of a small
fragment called the satellite.
8.5.11 Microbodies
Many membrane bound minute vesicles called microbodies that contain
various enzymes, are present in both plant and animal cells.
SUMMARY
All organisms are made of cells or aggregates of cells. Cells vary in their shape, size
and activities/functions. Based on the presence or absence of a membrane bound
nucleus and other organelles, cells and hence organisms can be named as
eukaryotic or prokaryotic.
A typical eukaryotic cell consists of a cell membrane, nucleus and cytoplasm.
Plant cells have a cell wall outside the cell membrane. The plasma membrane is
selectively permeable and facilitates transport of several molecules. The
endomembrane system includes ER, golgi complex, lysosomes and vacuoles. All
the cell organelles perform different but specific functions. Centrosome and centriole
form the basal body of cilia and flagella that facilitate locomotion. In animal cells,
centrioles also form spindle apparatus during cell division. Nucleus contains
nucleoli and chromatin network. It not only controls the activities of organelles
but also plays a major role in heredity.
Endoplasmic reticulum contains tubules or cisternae. They are of two types:
rough and smooth. ER helps in the transport of substances, synthesis of
proteins, lipoproteins and glycogen. The golgi body is a membranous organelle
composed of flattened sacs. The secretions of cells are packed in them and
transported from the cell. Lysosomes are single membrane structures
containing enzymes for digestion of all types of macromolecules. Ribosomes
are involved in protein synthesis. These occur freely in the cytoplasm or are
associated with ER. Mitochondria help in oxidative phosphorylation and
generation of adenosine triphosphate. They are bound by double membrane;
the outer membrane is smooth and inner one folds into several cristae. Plastids
are pigment containing organelles found in plant cells only. In plant cells,
chloroplasts are responsible for trapping light energy essential for
photosynthesis. The grana, in the plastid, is the site of light reactions and the
stroma of dark reactions. The green coloured plastids are chloroplasts, which
contain chlorophyll, whereas the other coloured plastids are chromoplasts,
which may contain pigments like carotene and xanthophyll. The nucleus is
enclosed by nuclear envelope, a double membrane structure with nuclear pores.
The inner membrane encloses the nucleoplasm and the chromatin material.
Thus, cell is the structural and functional unit of life.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 19 :
 CELL: THE UNIT OF LIFE
103
EXERCISES
1.
Which of the following is not correct?
(a) Robert Brown discovered the cell.
(b) Schleiden and Schwann formulated the cell theory.
(c) Virchow explained that cells are formed from pre-existing cells.
(d) A unicellular organism carries out its life activities within a single cell.
2.
New cells generate from
(a) bacterial fermentation
(b) regeneration of old cells
(c) pre-existing cells
(d) abiotic materials
3.
Match the following
Column I
Column II
(a) Cristae
(i) Flat membranous sacs in stroma
(b) Cisternae
(ii) Infoldings in mitochondria
(c) Thylakoids
(iii) Disc-shaped sacs in Golgi apparatus
4.
Which of the following is correct:
(a) Cells of all living organisms have a nucleus.
(b) Both animal and plant cells have a well defined cell wall.
(c) In prokaryotes, there are no membrane bound organelles.
(d) Cells are formed de novo from abiotic materials.
5.
What is a mesosome in a prokaryotic cell? Mention the functions that it performs.
6.
How do neutral solutes move across the plasma membrane? Can the polar
molecules also move across it in the same way? If not, then how are these
transported across the membrane?
7.
Name two cell-organelles that are double membrane bound. What are the
characteristics of these two organelles? State their functions and draw labelled
diagrams of both.
8.
What are the characteristics of prokaryotic cells?
9.
Multicellular organisms have division of labour. Explain.
10.
Cell is the basic unit of life. Discuss in brief.
11.
What are nuclear pores? State their function.
12.
Both lysosomes and vacuoles are endomembrane structures, yet they differ in
terms of their functions. Comment.
13.
Describe the structure of the following with the help of labelled diagrams.
(i)
Nucleus
(ii)
Centrosome
14.
What is a centromere? How does the position of centromere form the basis of
classification of chromosomes. Support your answer with a diagram showing
the position of centromere on different types of chromosomes.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 1 :
 104
BIOLOGY
There is a wide diversity in living organisms in our biosphere. Now a
question that arises in our minds is: Are all living organisms made of the
same chemicals, i.e., elements and compounds? You have learnt in
chemistry how elemental analysis is performed. If we perform such an
analysis on a plant tissue, animal tissue or a microbial paste, we obtain a
list of elements like carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and several others and
their respective content per unit mass of a living tissue. If the same analysis
is performed on a piece of earth’s crust as an example of non-living matter,
we obtain a similar list. What are the differences between the two lists? In
absolute terms, no such differences could be made out. All the elements
present in a sample of earth’s crust are also present in a sample of living
tissue. However, a closer examination reveals that the relative abundance
of carbon and hydrogen with respect to other elements is higher in any
living organism than in earth’s crust (Table 9.1).
9.1 HOW TO ANALYSE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION?
We can continue asking in the same way, what type of organic compounds
are found in living organisms? How does one go about finding the answer?
To get an answer, one has to perform a chemical analysis. We can take any
living tissue (a vegetable or a piece of liver, etc.) and grind it in trichloroacetic
acid (Cl3CCOOH) using a mortar and a pestle. We obtain a thick slurry. If
we were to strain this through a cheesecloth or cotton we would obtain two
fractions. One is called the filtrate or more technically, the acid-soluble
pool, and the second, the retentate or the acid-insoluble fraction. Scientists
have found thousands of organic compounds in the acid-soluble pool.
BIOMOLECULES
CHAPTER  9
9.1
How to Analyse
Chemical
Composition?
9.2
Primary and
Secondary
Metabolites
9.3
Biomacromolecules
9.4
Proteins
9.5
Polysaccharides
9.6
Nucleic Acids
9.7
Structure of
Proteins
9.8
Enzymes
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 2 :
 BIOMOLECULES
105
In higher classes you will learn about how
to analyse a living tissue sample and identify a
particular organic compound. It will suffice to
say here that one extracts the compounds, then
subjects the extract to various separation
techniques till one has separated a compound
from all other compounds. In other words, one
isolates and purifies a compound. Analytical
techniques, when applied to the compound give
us an idea of the molecular formula and the
probable structure of the compound. All the
carbon compounds that we get from living
tissues can be called ‘biomolecules’. However,
living organisms have also got inorganic
elements and compounds in them. How do we
know this? A slightly different but destructive
experiment has to be done. One weighs a small
amount of a living tissue (say a leaf or liver and
this is called wet weight) and dry it. All the water,
evaporates. The remaining material gives dry
weight. Now if the tissue is fully burnt, all the
carbon compounds are oxidised to gaseous
form (CO2, water vapour) and are removed. What
is remaining is called ‘ash’. This ash contains
inorganic elements (like calcium, magnesium
etc). Inorganic compounds like sulphate,
phosphate, etc., are also seen in the acid-soluble
fraction. Therefore elemental analysis gives
elemental composition of living tissues in the
form of hydrogen, oxygen, chlorine, carbon etc.
while analysis for compounds gives an idea of
Element
% Weight of
  Earth’s crust Human body
Hydrogen (H)
0.14
0.5
Carbon  (C)
0.03
18.5
Oxygen (O)
46.6
65.0
Nitrogen (N)
very little
3.3
Sulphur (S)
0.03
0.3
Sodium (Na)
2.8
0.2
Calcium (Ca)
3.6
1.5
Magnesium (Mg)
2.1
0.1
Silicon (Si)
27.7
negligible
* Adapted from CNR Rao, Understanding Chemistry,
Universities Press, Hyderabad.
TABLE 9.1 A Comparison of Elements Present
in Non-living and Living Matter*
Component
Formula
Sodium
Na+
Potassium
K+
Calcium
Ca++
Magnesium
Mg++
Water
H2O
Compounds
NaCl, CaCO3,
PO
SO
4
3
4
2
−
−
,
TABLE 9.2 A List of Representative Inorganic
Constituents of Living Tissues
the kind of organic (Figure 9.1) and inorganic constituents (Table 9.2)
present in living tissues. From a chemistry point of view, one can identify
functional groups like aldehydes, ketones, aromatic compounds, etc. But
from a biological point of view, we shall classify them into amino acids,
nucleotide bases, fatty acids etc.
Amino acids are organic compounds containing an amino group and
an acidic group as substituents on the same carbon i.e., the α-carbon.
Hence, they are called α-amino acids. They are substituted methanes. There
are four substituent groups occupying the four valency positions. These
are hydrogen, carboxyl group, amino group and a variable group
designated as R group. Based on the nature of R group there are many
amino acids. However, those which occur in proteins are only of twenty
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 3 :
 106
BIOLOGY
types. The R group in these proteinaceous amino acids could be a hydrogen
(the amino acid is called glycine), a methyl group (alanine), hydroxy methyl
(serine), etc. Three of the twenty are shown in Figure 9.1.
The chemical and physical properties of amino acids are essentially
of the amino, carboxyl and the R functional groups. Based on number of
amino and carboxyl groups, there are acidic (e.g., glutamic acid), basic
(lysine) and neutral (valine) amino acids. Similarly, there are aromatic
amino acids (tyrosine, phenylalanine, tryptophan). A particular property
of amino acids is the ionizable nature of –NH2 and –COOH groups. Hence
in solutions of different pH, the structure of amino acids changes.
B is called zwitterionic form.
Lipids are generally water insoluble. They could be simple fatty acids.
A fatty acid has a carboxyl group attached to an R group. The R group
could be a methyl (–CH3), or ethyl  (–C2H5) or higher number of –CH2
groups (1 carbon to 19 carbons). For example, palmitic acid has 16
carbons including carboxyl carbon. Arachidonic acid has 20 carbon
atoms including the carboxyl carbon. Fatty acids could be saturated
(without double bond) or unsaturated (with one or more C=C double
bonds). Another simple lipid is glycerol which is trihydroxy propane. Many
lipids have both glycerol and fatty acids. Here the fatty acids are found
esterified with glycerol. They can be then monoglycerides, diglycerides
and triglycerides. These are also called fats and oils based on melting
point. Oils have lower melting point (e.g., gingelly oil) and hence remain
as oil in winters. Can you identify a fat from the market? Some lipids
have phosphorous and a phosphorylated organic compound in them.
These are phospholipids. They are found in cell membrane. Lecithin is
one example. Some tissues especially the neural tissues have lipids with
more complex structures.
Living organisms have a number of carbon compounds in which
heterocyclic rings can be found. Some of these are nitrogen bases –
adenine, guanine, cytosine, uracil, and thymine. When found attached to
a sugar, they are called nucleosides. If a phosphate group is also found
esterified to the sugar they are called nucleotides. Adenosine, guanosine,
thymidine, uridine and  cytidine are nucleosides. Adenylic acid, thymidylic
acid, guanylic acid, uridylic acid and cytidylic acid are nucleotides. Nucleic
acids like DNA and RNA consist of nucleotides only. DNA and RNA function
as genetic material.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 4 :
 BIOMOLECULES
107
Cholesterol
Phospholipid (Lecithin)
Fats and oils (lipids)
(CH )
2 14
CH3
COOH
Fatty acid
(Palmitic acid)
Glycerol
Triglyceride (R1, R2
and R3 are fatty acids)
Nitrogen bases
OH
OH
Adenine
O
OCH2
P
HO
OH
O
Adenylic acid
Nucleotide
OH
OH
HOCH2
Adenine
O
OH
OH
HOCH2
Uracil
O
Adenosine
Uridine
Nucleosides
OH
OH
OH
HOCH2
O
OH
OH
HO
OH
CH OH
2
O
C6H12O6 (Glucose)
C5H10O5 (Ribose)
Sugars (Carbohydrates)
Serine
Glycine
Amino acids
Alanine
Figure 9.1
Diagrammatic representation of small molecular weight organic
compounds in living tissues
O
O
HN
N
H
Adenine (Purine)
Uracil (Pyrimidine)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 5 :
 108
BIOLOGY
9.2 PRIMARY AND SECONDARY METABOLITES
The most exciting aspect of chemistry deals with isolating thousands of
compounds, small and big, from living organisms, determining their
structure and if possible synthesising them.
If one were to make a list of biomolecules, such a list would have
thousands of organic compounds including amino acids, sugars, etc.
For reasons that are given in section 9.10, we can call these biomolecules
as ‘metabolites’. In animal tissues, one notices the presence of all such
categories of compounds shown in Figure 9.1. These are called primary
metabolites. However, when one analyses plant, fungal and microbial cells,
one would see thousands of compounds other than these called primary
metabolites, e.g. alkaloids, flavonoids, rubber, essential oils, antibiotics,
coloured pigments, scents, gums, spices. These
are called secondary metabolites (Table 9.3).
While primary metabolites have identifiable
functions and play known roles in normal
physiologial processes, we do not at the moment,
understand the role or functions of all the
‘secondary metabolites’ in host organisms.
However, many of them are useful to ‘human
welfare’ (e.g., rubber, drugs, spices, scents and
pigments). Some secondary metabolites have
ecological importance. In the later chapters and
years you will learn more about this.
9.3 BIOMACROMOLECULES
There is one feature common to all those compounds found in the acid
soluble pool. They have molecular weights ranging from 18 to around
800 daltons (Da) approximately.
The acid insoluble fraction, has only four types of organic compounds
i.e., proteins, nucleic acids, polysaccharides and lipids. These classes of
compounds with the exception of lipids, have molecular weights in the
range of ten thousand daltons and above. For this very reason,
biomolecules, i.e., chemical compounds found in living organisms are of
two types. One, those which have molecular weights less than one
thousand dalton and are usually referred to as micromolecules or simply
biomolecules while those which are found in the acid insoluble fraction
are called macromolecules or biomacromolecules.
The molecules in the insoluble fraction with the exception of lipids
are polymeric substances. Then why do lipids, whose molecular weights
do not exceed 800 Da, come under acid insoluble fraction, i.e.,
macromolecular fraction? Lipids are indeed small molecular weight
Pigments
Carotenoids, Anthocyanins,
etc.
Alkaloids
Morphine, Codeine, etc.
Terpenoides
Monoterpenes, Diterpenes etc.
Essential oils Lemon grass oil, etc.
Toxins
Abrin, Ricin
Lectins
Concanavalin A
Drugs
Vinblastin, curcumin, etc.
Polymeric
Rubber, gums, cellulose
substances
TABLE 9.3  Some Secondary Metabolites
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 6 :
 BIOMOLECULES
109
Component
% of the total
cellular mass
Water
70-90
Proteins
10-15
Carbohydrates
3
Lipids
2
Nucleic acids
5-7
Ions
1
TABLE 9.4  Average Composition of Cells
compounds and are present not only as such but also
arranged into structures like cell membrane and other
membranes. When we grind a tissue, we are disrupting
the cell structure. Cell membrane and other
membranes are broken into pieces, and form vesicles
which are not water soluble. Therefore, these
membrane fragments in the form of vesicles get
separated along with the acid insoluble pool and hence
in the macromolecular fraction. Lipids are not strictly
macromolecules.
The acid soluble pool represents roughly the
cytoplasmic composition. The macromolecules from
cytoplasm and organelles become the acid insoluble
fraction. Together they represent the entire chemical
composition of living tissues or organisms.
In summary if we represent the chemical
composition of living tissue from abundance point of
view and arrange them class-wise, we observe that
water is the most abundant chemical in living
organisms (Table 9.4).
9.4 PROTEINS
Proteins are polypeptides. They are linear chains of
amino acids linked by peptide bonds as shown in
Figure 9.3.
Each protein is a polymer of amino acids. As there
are 20 types of amino acids (e.g., alanine, cysteine,
proline, tryptophan, lysine, etc.), a protein is a
heteropolymer and not a homopolymer. A
homopolymer has only one type of monomer repeating
‘n’ number of times. This information about the amino
acid content is important as later in your nutrition
lessons, you will learn that certain amino acids are
essential for our health and they have to be supplied
through our diet. Hence, dietary proteins are the
source of essential amino acids. Therefore, amino acids
can be essential or non-essential. The latter are those
which our body can make, while we get essential amino
acids through our diet/food. Proteins carry out many
functions in living organisms, some transport
nutrients across cell membrane, some fight infectious
organisms, some are hormones, some are enzymes,
TABLE 9.5
Some Proteins and their
Functions
Protein
Functions
Collagen
Intercellular ground
substance
Trypsin
Enzyme
Insulin
Hormone
Antibody
Fights infectious agents
Receptor
Sensory reception
(smell, taste, hormone,
etc.)
GLUT-4
Enables glucose
transport
into cells
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 7 :
 110
BIOLOGY
CH OH
2
CH OH
2
CH2
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Figure 9.2 Diagrammatic representation of a portion of glycogen
etc. (Table 9.5). Collagen is the most abundant protein in animal world
and Ribulose bisphosphate Carboxylase-Oxygenase (RuBisCO) is the
most abundant protein in the whole of the biosphere.
9.5 POLYSACCHARIDES
The acid insoluble pellet also has polysaccharides (carbohydrates) as
another class of macromolecules. Polysaccharides are long chains of
sugars. They are threads (literally a cotton thread) containing different
monosaccharides as building blocks. For example, cellulose is a
polymeric polysaccharide consisting of only one type of monosaccharide
i.e., glucose. Cellulose is a homopolymer. Starch is a variant of this but
present as a store house of energy in plant tissues. Animals have another
variant called glycogen. Inulin is a polymer of fructose. In a
polysaccharide chain (say glycogen), the right end is called the reducing
end and the left end is called the non-reducing end. It has branches as
shown in the form of a cartoon (Figure 9.2). Starch forms helical
secondary structures. In fact, starch can hold I2 molecules in the helical
portion. The starch-I2 is blue in colour. Cellulose does not contain
complex helices and hence cannot hold I2.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 8 :
 BIOMOLECULES
111
Plant cell walls are made of cellulose. Paper made from plant pulp
and cotton fibre is cellulosic. There are more complex polysaccharides
in nature. They have as building blocks, amino-sugars and chemically
modified sugars (e.g., glucosamine, N-acetyl galactosamine, etc.).
Exoskeletons of arthropods, for example, have a complex
polysaccharide called chitin. These complex polysaccharides are mostly
homopolymers.
9.6 NUCLEIC ACIDS
The other type of macromolecule that one would find in the acid
insoluble fraction of any living tissue is the nucleic acid. These are
polynucleotides. Together with polysaccharides and polypeptides these
comprise the true macromolecular fraction of any living tissue or cell.
For nucleic acids, the building block is a nucleotide. A nucleotide has
three chemically distinct components. One is a heterocyclic compound,
the second is a monosaccharide and the third a phosphoric acid or
phosphate.
As you notice in Figure 9.1, the heterocyclic compounds in nucleic
acids are the nitrogenous bases named adenine, guanine, uracil,
cytosine, and thymine. Adenine and Guanine are substituted purines
while the rest are substituted pyrimidines. The skeletal heterocyclic ring
is called as purine and pyrimidine respectively. The sugar found in
polynucleotides is either ribose (a monosaccharide pentose) or 2’
deoxyribose. A nucleic acid containing deoxyribose is called
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) while that which contains ribose is called
ribonucleic acid (RNA).
9.7
STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS
Proteins, as mentioned earlier, are heteropolymers containing strings
of amino acids. Structure of molecules means different things in
different contexts. In inorganic chemistry, the structure invariably
refers to the molecular formulae (e.g., NaCl, MgCl2, etc.). Organic
chemists always write a two dimensional view of the molecules while
representing the structure of the molecules (e.g., benzene,
naphthalene, etc.). Physicists conjure up the three dimensional views
of molecular structures while biologists describe the protein structure
at four levels. The sequence of amino acids i.e., the positional
information in a protein – which is the first amino acid, which is
second, and so on – is called the primary structure (Figure 9.3 a) of
a protein. A protein is imagined as a line, the left end represented by
the first amino acid and the right end represented by the last amino
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 9 :
 112
BIOLOGY
acid. The first amino acid is also
called as N-terminal amino acid. The
last amino acid is called the C-
terminal amino acid. A protein
thread does not exist throughout as
an extended rigid rod. The thread is
folded in the form of a helix (similar
to a revolving staircase). Of course,
only some portions of the protein
thread are arranged in the form of a
helix. In proteins, only right handed
helices are observed. Other regions
of the protein thread are folded into
other forms in what is called the
secondary structure (Fig. 9.3 b). In
addition, the long protein chain is
also folded upon itself like a hollow
woolen ball, giving rise to the
tertiary structure (Fig. 9.3 c). This
gives us a 3-dimensional view of a
protein.  Tertiary  structure  is
absolutely necessary for the many
biological activities of proteins.
Figure 9.3 Various levels of Protein Structure
(a) Primary
(b) Secondary
(d)     Quaternary
Hydrogen
Disulphide bond
Beta– plated sheet
Polypeptide
Tertiary
Alpha – Helix
(c)
Some proteins are an assembly of more than one polypeptide or
subunits. The manner in which these individual folded polypeptides
or subunits are arranged with respect to each other (e.g. linear string
of spheres, spheres arranged one upon each other in the form of a
cube or plate etc.) is the architecture of a protein otherwise called
the quaternary structure of a protein (Fig. 9.3 d). Adult human
haemoglobin consists of 4 subunits. Two of these are identical to
each other. Hence, two subunits of α type and two subunits of β
type together constitute the human haemoglobin (Hb).
9.8
ENZYMES
Almost all enzymes are proteins. There are some nucleic acids that behave
like enzymes. These are called ribozymes. One can depict an enzyme by a
line diagram. An enzyme like any protein has a primary structure, i.e.,
amino acid sequence of the protein. An enzyme like any protein has the
secondary and the tertiary structure. When you look at a tertiary structure
(Figure 9.3 d)  you will notice that the backbone of the protein chain folds
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 10 :
 BIOMOLECULES
113
←

upon itself, the chain criss-crosses itself and hence, many crevices or
pockets are made. One such pocket is the ‘active site’. An active site of an
enzyme is a crevice or pocket into which the substrate fits. Thus enzymes,
through their active site, catalyse reactions at a high rate. Enzyme catalysts
differ from inorganic catalysts in many ways, but one major difference
needs mention. Inorganic catalysts work efficiently at high temperatures
and high pressures, while enzymes get damaged at high temperatures
(say above 40°C). However, enzymes isolated from organisms who normally
live under extremely high temperatures (e.g., hot vents and sulphur
springs), are stable and retain their catalytic power even at high
temperatures (upto 80°-90°C). Thermal stability is thus an important
quality of such enzymes isolated from thermophilic organisms.
9.8.1
Chemical Reactions
How do we understand these enzymes? Let us first understand a chemical
reaction. Chemical compounds undergo two types of changes. A physical
change simply refers to a change in shape without breaking of bonds.
This is a physical process. Another physical process is a change in state
of matter: when ice melts into water, or when water becomes a vapour.
These are also physical processes. However, when bonds are broken and
new bonds are formed during transformation, this will be called a chemical
reaction. For example:
Ba(OH)2 + H2SO4 → BaSO4 + 2H2O
is an inorganic chemical reaction. Similarly, hydrolysis of starch into
glucose is an organic chemical reaction. Rate of a physical or chemical
process refers to the amount of product formed per unit time. It can be
expressed as:
rate = δ
δ
P
t
Rate can also be called velocity if the direction is specified. Rates of physical
and chemical processes are influenced by temperature among other
factors. A general rule of thumb is that rate doubles or decreases by half
for every 10°C change in either direction. Catalysed reactions proceed at
rates vastly higher than that of uncatalysed ones. When enzyme catalysed
reactions are observed, the rate would be vastly higher than the same
but uncatalysed reaction. For example
CO2             +           H2O  →
Carbonic anhydrase
 H2CO3
carbon dioxide
water
carbonic acid
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 11 :
 114
BIOLOGY
In the absence of any enzyme this reaction is very slow, with about
200 molecules of H2CO3 being formed in an hour. However, by using the
enzyme present within the cytoplasm called carbonic anhydrase, the
reaction speeds dramatically with about 600,000 molecules being formed
every second. The enzyme has accelerated the reaction rate by about 10
million times. The power of enzymes is incredible indeed!
There are thousands of types of enzymes each catalysing a unique
chemical or metabolic reaction. A multistep chemical reaction, when each
of the steps is catalysed by the same enzyme complex or different enzymes,
is called a metabolic pathway. For example,
Glucose →2 Pyruvic acid
C6H12O6  +  O2 → 2C3H4 O3 + 2H2O
is actually a metabolic pathway in which glucose becomes pyruvic acid
through ten different enzyme catalysed metabolic reactions. When you
study respiration in Chapter 12 you will study these reactions.  At this
stage you should know that this very metabolic pathway with one or two
additional reactions gives rise to a variety of metabolic end products. In
our skeletal muscle, under anaerobic conditions, lactic acid is formed.
Under normal aerobic conditions, pyruvic acid is formed. In yeast,  during
fermentation, the same pathway leads to the production of ethanol
(alcohol). Hence, in different conditions different products are possible.
9.8.2
How do Enzymes bring about such High Rates of
Chemical Conversions?
To understand this we should study enzymes a little more. We have already
understood the idea of an ‘active site’. The chemical or metabolic conversion
refers to a reaction. The chemical which is converted into a product is
called a ‘substrate’. Hence enzymes, i.e. proteins with three dimensional
structures including an ‘active site’, convert a substrate (S) into a product
(P). Symbolically, this can be depicted as:
S →P
It is now understood that the substrate ‘S’ has to bind the enzyme at
its ‘active site’ within a given cleft or pocket. The substrate has to diffuse
towards the ‘active site’. There is thus, an obligatory formation of an ‘ES’
complex. E stands for enzyme. This complex formation is a transient
phenomenon. During the state where substrate is bound to the enzyme
active site, a new structure of the substrate called transition state structure
is formed. Very soon, after the expected bond breaking/making is
completed, the product is released from the active site. In other words,
the structure of substrate gets transformed into the structure of product(s).
The pathway of this transformation must go through the so-called
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 12 :
 BIOMOLECULES
115
transition state structure. There could be many
more ‘altered structural states’ between the stable
substrate and the product. Implicit in this
statement is the fact that all other intermediate
structural states are unstable. Stability is
something related to energy status of the
molecule or the structure. Hence, when we look
at this pictorially through a graph it looks like
something as in Figure 9.4.
The y-axis represents the potential energy
content. The x-axis represents the progression
of the structural transformation or states
through the ‘transition state’. You would notice
two things. The energy level difference between
S and P. If ‘P’ is at a lower level than ‘S’, the reaction
is an exothermic reaction. One need not supply
energy (by heating) in order to form the product.
However, whether it is an exothermic or spontaneous reaction or an
endothermic or energy requiring reaction, the ‘S’ has to go through a much
higher energy state or transition state. The difference in average energy content
of ‘S’ from that of this transition state is called ‘activation energy’.
Enzymes eventually bring down this energy barrier making the
transition of ‘S’ to ‘P’ more easy.
9.8.3
Nature of Enzyme Action
Each enzyme (E) has a substrate (S) binding site in its molecule so that a
highly reactive enzyme-substrate complex (ES) is produced. This
complex is short-lived and dissociates into its product(s) P and the
unchanged enzyme with an intermediate formation of the enzyme-product
complex (EP).
The formation of the ES complex is essential for catalysis.
E + S     
     ES  
→

 EP 
→

  E + P
The catalytic cycle of an enzyme action can be described in the following
steps:
1.
First, the substrate binds to the active site of the enzyme, fitting
into the active site.
2.
The binding of the substrate induces the enzyme to alter its shape,
fitting more tightly around the substrate.
3.
The active site of the enzyme, now in close proximity of the
substrate breaks the chemical bonds of the substrate and the
new enzyme- product complex is formed.
Activation energy
without enzyme
Potential Energy
Activation
energy with enzyme
Substrate (s)
Product (P)
Progress of reaction
Transition state
Figure  9.4 Concept of activation energy
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 13 :
 116
BIOLOGY
4.
The enzyme releases the products of the reaction and the free
enzyme is ready to bind to another molecule of the substrate and
run through the catalytic cycle once again.
9.8.4
Factors Affecting Enzyme Activity
The activity of an enzyme can be affected by a change in the conditions
which can alter the tertiary structure of the protein. These include
temperature, pH, change in substrate concentration or binding of specific
chemicals that regulate its activity.
Temperature and pH
Enzymes generally function in a narrow range of temperature and pH
(Figure 9.5). Each enzyme shows its highest activity at a particular
temperature and pH called the optimum temperature and optimum pH.
Activity declines both below and above the optimum value. Low
temperature preserves the enzyme in a temporarily inactive state whereas
high temperature destroys enzymatic activity because proteins are
denatured by heat.
Concentration of Substrate
With the increase in substrate concentration, the velocity of the enzymatic
reaction rises at first. The reaction ultimately reaches a maximum velocity
(Vmax) which is not exceeded by any further rise in concentration of the
substrate. This is because the enzyme molecules are fewer than the
substrate molecules and after saturation of these molecules, there are no
free enzyme molecules to bind with the additional substrate molecules
(Figure 9.5).
The activity of an enzyme is also sensitive to the presence of specific
chemicals that bind to the enzyme. When the binding of the chemical
Figure 9.5 Effect of change in : (a) pH  (b) Temperature and (c) Concentration of
substrate on enzyme activity
Vmax
Velocity of reaction (V)
[S]
V
2
max
Km
(a)
(b)
(c)
pH
Temperature
Enzyme activity
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 14 :
 BIOMOLECULES
117
shuts off enzyme activity, the process is called inhibition and the chemical
is called an inhibitor.
When the inhibitor closely resembles the substrate in its molecular
structure and inhibits the activity of the enzyme, it is known as
competitive inhibitor. Due to its close structural similarity with the
substrate, the inhibitor competes with the substrate for the substrate-
binding site of the enzyme. Consequently, the substrate cannot bind and
as a result, the enzyme action declines, e.g., inhibition of succinic
dehydrogenase by malonate which closely resembles the substrate
succinate in structure. Such competitive inhibitors are often used in the
control of bacterial pathogens.
9.8.5
Classification and Nomenclature of Enzymes
Thousands of enzymes have been discovered, isolated and studied. Most
of these enzymes have been classified into different groups based on the
type of reactions they catalyse. Enzymes are divided into 6 classes each
with 4-13 subclasses and named accordingly by a four-digit number.
Oxidoreductases/dehydrogenases: Enzymes which catalyse
oxidoreduction between two substrates S and S’ e.g.,
S reduced + S’ oxidised 
→

 S oxidised + S’ reduced.
Transferases: Enzymes catalysing a transfer of a group, G (other than
hydrogen) between a pair of substrate S and S’ e.g.,
S - G + S’  
→

 S + S’ - G
Hydrolases: Enzymes catalysing hydrolysis of ester, ether, peptide,
glycosidic, C-C, C-halide or P-N bonds.
Lyases: Enzymes that catalyse removal of groups from substrates by
mechanisms other than hydrolysis leaving double bonds.
Isomerases: Includes all enzymes catalysing inter-conversion of optical,
geometric or positional isomers.
Ligases: Enzymes catalysing the linking together of 2 compounds, e.g.,
enzymes which catalyse joining of C-O, C-S, C-N,  P-O etc. bonds.
9.8.6
Co-factors
Enzymes are composed of one or several polypeptide chains. However,
there are a number of cases in which non-protein constituents called co-
factors are bound to the the enzyme to make the enzyme catalytically
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 15 :
 118
BIOLOGY
active. In these instances, the protein portion of the enzymes is called the
apoenzyme. Three kinds of cofactors may be identified: prosthetic groups,
co-enzymes and metal ions.
Prosthetic groups are organic compounds and are distinguished from
other cofactors in that they are tightly bound to the apoenzyme. For
example, in peroxidase and catalase, which catalyze the breakdown of
hydrogen peroxide to water and oxygen, haem is the prosthetic group
and it is a part of the active site of the enzyme.
Co-enzymes are also organic compounds but their association with
the apoenzyme is only transient, usually occurring during the course of
catalysis. Furthermore, co-enzymes serve as co-factors in a number of
different enzyme catalyzed reactions. The essential chemical components
of many coenzymes are vitamins, e.g., coenzyme nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NAD) and NADP contain the vitamin niacin.
A number of enzymes require metal ions for their activity which form
coordination bonds with side chains at the active site and at the same
time form one or more cordination bonds with the substrate, e.g., zinc is
a cofactor for the proteolytic enzyme carboxypeptidase.
Catalytic  activity is lost when the co-factor is removed from the enzyme
which testifies that they play a crucial role in the catalytic activity of the
enzyme.
SUMMARY
Although there is a bewildering diversity of living organisms, their chemical
composition and metabolic reactions appear to be remarkably similar. The
elemental composition of living tissues and non-living matter appear also to be
similar when analysed qualitatively. However, a closer examination reveals that
the relative abundance of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen is higher in living systems
when compared to inanimate matter. The most abundant chemical in living
organisms is water. There are thousands of small molecular weight (<1000 Da)
biomolecules. Amino acids, monosaccharide and disaccharide sugars, fatty acids,
glycerol, nucleotides, nucleosides and nitrogen bases are some of the organic
compounds seen in living organisms. There are 20 types of amino acids and 5
types of nucleotides. Fats and oils are glycerides in which fatty acids are esterified
to glycerol. Phospholipids contain, in addition, a phosphorylated nitrogenous
compound.
Only three types of macromolecules, i.e., proteins, nucleic acids and
polysaccharides are found in living systems. Lipids, because of their association
with membranes separate in the macromolecular fraction. Biomacromolecules
are polymers. They are made of building blocks which are different. Proteins
are heteropolymers made of amino acids. Nucleic acids (RNA and DNA) are
composed of nucleotides. Biomacromolecules have a hierarchy of structures –
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 09 - Page 16 :
 BIOMOLECULES
119
primary, secondary, tertiary and quaternary. Nucleic acids serve as genetic
material. Polysaccharides are components of cell wall in plants, fungi and also
of the exoskeleton of arthropods. They also are storage forms of energy (e.g.,
starch and glycogen). Proteins serve a variety of cellular functions. Many of
them are enzymes, some are antibodies, some are receptors, some are hormones
and some others are structural proteins. Collagen is the most abundant protein
in animal world and Ribulose bisphosphate Carboxylase-Oxygenase (RuBisCO)
is the most abundant protein in the whole of the biosphere.
Enzymes are proteins which catalyse biochemical reactions in the cells.
Ribozymes are nucleic acids with catalytic power. Proteinaceous enzymes exhibit
substrate specificity, require optimum temperature and pH for maximal activity.
They are denatured at high temperatures. Enzymes lower activation energy of
reactions and enhance greatly the rate of the reactions. Nucleic acids carry
hereditary information and are passed on from parental generation to progeny.
EXERCISES
1.
What are macromolecules? Give examples.
2.
What is meant by tertiary structure of proteins?
3.
Find and write down structures of 10 interesting small molecular weight
biomolecules. Find if there is any industry which manufactures the compounds
by isolation. Find out who are the buyers.
4.
Find out and make a list of proteins used as therapeutic agents. Find other
applications of proteins (e.g., Cosmetics etc.)
5.
Explain the composition of triglyceride.
6.
Can you attempt building models of biomolecules using commercially available
atomic models (Ball and Stick models).
7.
Draw the structure of the amino acid, alanine.
8.
What are gums made of? Is Fevicol different?
9.
Find out a qualitative test for proteins, fats and oils, amino acids and test any
fruit juice, saliva, sweat and urine for them.
10.
Find out how much cellulose is made by all the plants in the biosphere and
compare it with how much of paper is manufactured by man and hence what is
the consumption of plant material by man annually. What a loss of vegetation!
11.
Describe the important properties of enzymes.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 10 - Page 1 :
 120
BIOLOGY
Are you aware that all organisms, even the largest, start their life from a
single cell? You may wonder how a single cell then goes on to form such
large organisms. Growth and reproduction are characteristics of cells,
indeed of all living organisms. All cells reproduce by dividing into two,
with each parental cell giving rise to two daughter cells each time they
divide. These newly formed daughter cells can themselves grow and divide,
giving rise to a new cell population that is formed by the growth and
division of a single parental cell and its progeny. In other words, such
cycles of growth and division allow a single cell to form a structure
consisting of millions of cells.
10.1
CELL CYCLE
Cell division is a very important  process in all living organisms. During
the division of a cell, DNA replication and cell growth also take place. All
these processes, i.e., cell division, DNA replication, and cell growth, hence,
have to take place in a coordinated way to ensure correct division and
formation of progeny cells containing intact genomes. The sequence of
events by which a cell duplicates its genome, synthesises the other
constituents of the cell and eventually divides into two daughter cells is
termed cell cycle. Although cell growth (in terms of cytoplasmic increase)
is a continuous process, DNA synthesis occurs only during one specific
stage in the cell cycle. The replicated chromosomes (DNA) are then
distributed to daughter nuclei by a complex series of events during cell
division. These events are themselves under genetic control.
CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION
CHAPTER  10
10.1 Cell Cycle
10.2 M Phase
10.3 Significance of
Mitosis
10.4 Meiosis
10.5 Significance of
Meiosis
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 10 - Page 2 :
 CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION
121
10.1.1 Phases of Cell Cycle
A typical eukaryotic cell cycle is illustrated by
human cells in culture. These cells divide once
in approximately every 24 hours (Figure 10.1).
However, this duration of cell cycle can vary from
organism to organism and also from cell type
to cell type. Yeast for example, can progress
through the cell cycle in only about 90 minutes.
The cell cycle is divided into two basic
phases:

Interphase

M Phase (Mitosis phase)
The M Phase represents the phase when the
actual cell division or mitosis occurs and the
interphase represents the phase between two
successive M phases. It is significant to note that
in the 24 hour average duration of cell cycle of a
human cell, cell division proper lasts for only
about an hour. The interphase lasts more than
95% of the duration of cell cycle.
The M Phase starts with the nuclear division, corresponding to the
separation of daughter chromosomes (karyokinesis) and usually ends
with division of cytoplasm (cytokinesis). The interphase, though  called
the resting phase,  is the time during which the cell is preparing for division
by undergoing both cell growth and DNA replication in an orderly manner.
The interphase is divided into three further phases:

G1 phase (Gap 1)

S phase  (Synthesis)

G2 phase (Gap 2)
 G1 phase corresponds to the interval between mitosis and initiation
of DNA replication. During G1 phase the cell is metabolically active and
continuously grows but does not replicate its DNA. S or synthesis  phase
marks the period during which DNA synthesis or replication takes place.
During this time the amount of DNA per cell doubles.  If the initial amount
of DNA is denoted as 2C then it increases to 4C. However, there is no
increase in the chromosome number; if the cell had diploid or 2n number
of chromosomes at G1, even after S phase the number of chromosomes
remains the same, i.e., 2n.
In animal cells, during the S phase, DNA replication begins in the
nucleus, and the centriole duplicates in the cytoplasm. During the G2
phase, proteins are synthesised in preparation for mitosis while cell growth
continues.
How do plants and
animals continue to
grow all their lives?
Do all cells in a plant
divide all the time?
Do you think all cells
continue to divide in
all 
plants 
and
animals? Can you
tell the name and the
location of tissues
having cells that
divide all their life in
higher plants? Do
animals have similar
m e r i s t e m a t i c
tissues?
Figure 10.1 A diagrammatic view of cell cycle
indicating formation of two cells
from one cell
M Phase
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 10 - Page 3 :
 122
BIOLOGY
Some cells in the adult animals do not appear to exhibit division (e.g.,
heart cells) and many other cells divide only occasionally, as needed to
replace cells that have been lost because of injury or cell death. These
cells that do not divide further exit G1 phase to enter an inactive stage
called quiescent stage (G
quiescent stage (G
quiescent stage (G
quiescent stage (G
quiescent stage (G00000))))) of the cell cycle. Cells in this stage remain
metabolically active but no longer proliferate unless called on to do so
depending on the requirement of the organism.
In animals, mitotic cell division is only seen in the diploid somatic
cells. However, there are few exceptions to this where haploid cells divide
by mitosis, for example, male honey bees. Against this, the plants can
show mitotic divisions in both haploid and diploid cells. From your
recollection of examples of alternation of generations in plants (Chapter 3)
identify plant species and stages at which mitosis is seen in haploid cells.
10.2
10.2
10.2
10.2
10.2
M P
M P
M P
M P
M PHASE
HASE
HASE
HASE
HASE
This is the most dramatic period of the cell cycle, involving a major
reorganisation of virtually all components of the cell. Since the number of
chromosomes in the parent and progeny cells is the same, it is also called as
equational division
equational division
equational division
equational division
equational division. Though for convenience mitosis has been divided
into four stages of nuclear division (karyokinesis), it is very essential to
understand that cell division is a progressive process and very clear-cut
lines cannot be drawn between various stages. Karyokinesis involves
following four stages:

Prophase
Prophase
Prophase
Prophase
Prophase

Metaphase
Metaphase
Metaphase
Metaphase
Metaphase

Anaphase
Anaphase
Anaphase
Anaphase
Anaphase

Telophase
Telophase
Telophase
Telophase
Telophase
10.2.1
10.2.1
10.2.1
10.2.1
10.2.1 Prophase
Prophase
Prophase
Prophase
Prophase
Prophase which is the first stage of karyokinesis of mitosis follows the
S and G2 phases of interphase. In the S and G2 phases the new DNA
molecules formed are not distinct but intertwined. Prophase is marked
by the initiation of condensation of chromosomal material. The
chromosomal material becomes untangled during the process of
chromatin condensation (Figure 10.2 a). The centrosome, which had
undergone duplication during S phase of interphase, now begins to move
towards opposite poles of the cell. The completion of prophase can thus
be marked by the following characteristic events:

Chromosomal material condenses to form compact mitotic
chromosomes. Chromosomes are seen to be composed of two
chromatids attached together at the centromere.

Centrosome which had undergone duplication during interphase,
begins to move towards opposite poles of the cell. Each centrosome
radiates out microtubules called asters. The two asters together
with spindle fibres forms mitotic apparatus.
You have studied
mitosis in onion root
tip cells.  It has 16
chromosomes 
in
each cell.  Can you
tell 
how 
many
chromosomes will
the cell have at G1
phase, after S phase,
and after M phase?
Also, what will be the
DNA content of the
cells at G1, after S
and at G2, if the
content 
after 
M
phase is 2C?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 10 - Page 4 :
 CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION
123
Cells at the end of prophase, when viewed under the
microscope, do not show golgi complexes, endoplasmic
reticulum, nucleolus and the nuclear envelope.
10.2.2 Metaphase
The complete disintegration of the nuclear envelope marks
the start of the second phase of mitosis, hence the
chromosomes are spread through the cytoplasm of the cell.
By this stage, condensation of chromosomes is completed
and they can be observed clearly under the microscope. This
then, is the stage at which morphology of chromosomes is
most easily studied. At this stage, metaphase chromosome
is made up of two sister chromatids, which are held together
by the centromere (Figure 10.2 b). Small disc-shaped
structures at the surface of the centromeres are called
kinetochores. These structures serve as the sites of attachment
of spindle fibres (formed by the spindle fibres) to the
chromosomes that are moved into position at the centre of
the cell. Hence, the metaphase is characterised by all the
chromosomes coming to lie at the equator with one chromatid
of each chromosome connected by its kinetochore to spindle
fibres from one pole and its sister chromatid connected by
its kinetochore to spindle fibres from the opposite pole (Figure
10.2 b). The plane of alignment of the chromosomes at
metaphase is referred to as the metaphase plate.  The key
features of metaphase are:

Spindle fibres attach to kinetochores of
chromosomes.

Chromosomes are moved to spindle equator and get
aligned along metaphase plate through spindle fibres
to both poles.
10.2.3 Anaphase
At the onset of anaphase, each chromosome arranged at the
metaphase plate is split simultaneously and the two daughter
chromatids, now referred to as daughter  chromosomes of
the future daughter nuclei, begin their migration towards
the two opposite poles. As each chromosome moves away
from the equatorial plate, the centromere of each chromosome
remains directed towards the pole and hence at the leading
edge, with the arms of the chromosome trailing behind
(Figure 10.2 c). Thus, anaphase stage is characterised by
Figure 10.2 a and b : A diagrammatic
view of stages in mitosis
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 10 - Page 5 :
 124
BIOLOGY
the following key events:

Centromeres split and chromatids separate.

Chromatids move to opposite poles.
10.2.4 Telophase
At the beginning of the final stage of karyokinesis, i.e.,
telophase, the chromosomes that have reached their
respective poles decondense and lose their individuality. The
individual chromosomes can no longer be seen and each set
of chromatin material tends to collect at each of the two poles
(Figure 10.2 d). This is the stage which shows the following
key events:

Chromosomes cluster at opposite spindle poles and their
identity is lost as discrete elements.

Nuclear envelope develops around the chromosome
clusters at each pole forming two daughter nuclei.

Nucleolus, golgi complex and ER reform.
10.2.5 Cytokinesis
Mitosis accomplishes not only the segregation of duplicated
chromosomes into daughter nuclei (karyokinesis), but the
cell itself is divided into two daughter cells by the separation
of cytoplasm called cytokinesis at the end of which cell
division gets completed (Figure 10.2 e). In an animal cell,
this is achieved by the appearance of a furrow in the plasma
membrane. The furrow gradually deepens and ultimately
joins in the centre dividing the cell cytoplasm into two. Plant
cells however, are enclosed by a relatively inextensible cell
wall, thererfore they undergo cytokinesis by a different
mechanism. In plant cells, wall formation starts in the centre
of the cell and grows outward to meet the existing lateral
walls. The formation of the new cell wall begins with the
formation of a simple precursor, called the cell-plate that
represents the middle lamella between the walls of two
adjacent cells. At the time of cytoplasmic division, organelles
like mitochondria and plastids get distributed between the
two daughter cells. In some organisms karyokinesis is not
followed by cytokinesis as a result of which multinucleate
condition arises leading to the formation of syncytium (e.g.,
liquid endosperm in coconut).
Figure 10.2 c to e : A diagrammatic
view of stages in Mitosis
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 10 - Page 6 :
 CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION
125
10.3
Significance of Mitosis
Mitosis or the equational division is usually restricted to the diploid cells
only. However, in some lower plants and in some social insects haploid
cells also divide by mitosis. It is very essential to understand the
significance of this division in the life of an organism. Are you aware of
some examples where you have studied about haploid and diploid insects?
Mitosis usually results in the production of diploid daughter cells
with identical genetic complement. The growth of multicellular organisms
is due to mitosis. Cell growth results in disturbing the ratio between the
nucleus and the cytoplasm. It therefore becomes essential for the cell to
divide to restore the nucleo-cytoplasmic ratio. A very significant
contribution of mitosis is cell repair. The cells of the upper layer of the
epidermis, cells of the lining of the gut, and blood cells are being constantly
replaced. Mitotic divisions in the meristematic tissues – the apical and
the lateral cambium, result in a continuous growth of plants throughout
their life.
10.4
MEIOSIS
The production of offspring by sexual reproduction includes the fusion
of two gametes, each with a complete haploid set of chromosomes. Gametes
are formed from specialised diploid cells. This specialised kind of cell
division that reduces the chromosome number by half results in the
production of haploid daughter cells. This kind of division is called
meiosis. Meiosis ensures the production of haploid phase in the life cycle
of sexually reproducing organisms whereas fertilisation restores the diploid
phase. We come across meiosis during gametogenesis in plants and
animals. This leads to the formation of haploid gametes. The key features
of meiosis are as follows:

Meiosis involves two sequential cycles of nuclear and cell division called
meiosis I and meiosis II but only a single cycle of DNA replication.

Meiosis I is initiated after the parental chromosomes have replicated
to produce identical sister chromatids at the S phase.

Meiosis involves pairing of homologous chromosomes and
recombination between non-sister chromatids of homologous
chromosomes.

Four haploid cells are formed at the end of meiosis II.
Meiotic events can be grouped under the following phases:
Meiosis I
Meiosis II
Prophase I
Prophase II
Metaphase I
Metaphase II
Anaphase I
Anaphase II
Telophase I
Telophase II
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 10 - Page 7 :
 126
BIOLOGY
10.4.1 Meiosis I
Prophase I: Prophase of the first meiotic division is typically longer and
more complex when compared to prophase of mitosis. It has been further
subdivided into the following five phases based on chromosomal
behaviour, i.e., Leptotene, Zygotene, Pachytene, Diplotene and Diakinesis.
During leptotene stage the chromosomes become gradually visible
under the light microscope. The compaction of chromosomes continues
throughout leptotene. This is followed by the second stage of prophase
I called zygotene. During this stage chromosomes start pairing together
and this process of association is called synapsis. Such paired
chromosomes are called homologous chromosomes. Electron
micrographs of this stage indicate that chromosome synapsis is
accompanied by the formation of complex structure called
synaptonemal complex. The complex formed by a pair of synapsed
homologous chromosomes is called a bivalent or a tetrad. However,
these are more clearly visible at the next stage. The first two stages of
prophase I are relatively short-lived compared to the next stage that is
pachytene. During this stage, the four chromatids of each bivalent
chromosomes becomes distinct and clearly appears as tetrads. This stage
is characterised by the appearance of recombination nodules, the sites
at which crossing over occurs between non-sister chromatids of the
homologous chromosomes. Crossing over is the exchange of genetic
material between two homologous chromosomes. Crossing over is also
an enzyme-mediated process and the enzyme involved is called
recombinase. Crossing over leads to recombination of genetic material
on the two chromosomes. Recombination between homologous
chromosomes is completed by the end of pachytene, leaving the
chromosomes linked at the sites of crossing over.
The beginning of diplotene is recognised by the dissolution of the
synaptonemal complex and the tendency of the recombined
homologous chromosomes of the bivalents to separate from each other
except at the sites of crossovers. These X-shaped structures, are called
chiasmata. In oocytes of some vertebrates, diplotene can last for
months or years.
The final stage of meiotic prophase I is diakinesis. This is marked by
terminalisation of chiasmata. During this phase the chromosomes are
fully condensed and the meiotic spindle is assembled to prepare the
homologous chromosomes for separation. By the end of diakinesis, the
nucleolus disappears and the nuclear envelope also breaks down.
Diakinesis represents transition to metaphase.
Metaphase I: The bivalent chromosomes align on the equatorial plate
(Figure 10.3). The microtubules from the opposite poles of the spindle
attach to the kinetochore of homologous chromosomes.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 10 - Page 8 :
 CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION
127
Anaphase I: The homologous chromosomes separate, while sister
chromatids remain associated at their centromeres (Figure 10.3).
Telophase I: The nuclear membrane and nucleolus reappear, cytokinesis
follows and this is called as dyad of cells (Figure 10.3). Although in many
cases the chromosomes do undergo some dispersion, they do not reach
the extremely extended state of the interphase nucleus. The stage between
the two meiotic divisions is called interkinesis and is generally short lived.
There is no replication of DNA during interkinesis. Interkinesis is followed
by prophase II, a much simpler prophase than prophase I.
10.4.2 Meiosis II
Prophase II: Meiosis II is initiated immediately after cytokinesis, usually
before the chromosomes have fully elongated.  In contrast to meiosis I,
meiosis II resembles a normal mitosis. The nuclear membrane disappears
by the end of prophase II (Figure 10.4). The chromosomes again become
compact.
Metaphase II: At this stage the chromosomes align at the equator and
the microtubules from opposite poles of the spindle get attached to the
kinetochores (Figure 10.4) of sister chromatids.
Anaphase II: It begins with the simultaneous splitting of the centromere
of each chromosome  (which was holding the sister chromatids together),
allowing them to move toward opposite poles of the cell (Figure 10.4) by
shortening of microtubules attached to kinetochores.
Figure 10.3 Stages of Meiosis I
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 10 - Page 9 :
 128
BIOLOGY
Telophase II: Meiosis ends with telophase II, in which the two
groups of chromosomes once again get enclosed by a nuclear
envelope; cytokinesis follows resulting in the formation of tetrad
of cells i.e., four haploid daughter cells (Figure 10.4).
10.5
SIGNIFICANCE OF MEIOSIS
Meiosis is the mechanism by which conservation of specific
chromosome number of each species is achieved across
generations in sexually reproducing organisms, even though the
process, per se, paradoxically, results in reduction of chromosome
number by half. It also increases the genetic variability in the
population of organisms from one generation to the next. Variations
are very important for the process of evolution.
Figure 10.4 Stages of Meiosis II
SUMMARY
According to the cell theory, cells arise from preexisting cells. The process by
which this occurs is called cell division. Any sexually reproducing organism
starts its life cycle from a single-celled zygote. Cell division does not stop with
the formation of the mature organism but continues throughout its life cycle.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 10 - Page 10 :
 CELL CYCLE AND CELL DIVISION
129
The stages through which a cell passes from one division to the next is called
the cell cycle. Cell cycle is divided into two phases called (i) Interphase – a
period of preparation for cell division, and (ii) Mitosis (M phase) – the actual
period of cell division. Interphase is further subdivided into G1, S and G2. G1
phase is the period when the cell grows and carries out normal metabolism.
Most of the organelle duplication also occurs during this phase. S phase marks
the phase of DNA replication and chromosome duplication. G2 phase is the
period of cytoplasmic growth. Mitosis is also divided into four stages namely
prophase, metaphase, anaphase and telophase. Chromosome condensation
occurs during prophase. Simultaneously, the centrioles move to the opposite
poles. The nuclear envelope and the nucleolus disappear and the spindle
fibres start appearing. Metaphase is marked by the alignment of chromosomes
at the equatorial plate. During anaphase the centromeres divide and the
chromatids start moving towards the two opposite poles. Once the chromatids
reach the two poles, the chromosomal elongation starts, nucleolus and the
nuclear membrane reappear. This stage is called the telophase.  Nuclear
division is then followed by the cytoplasmic division and is called cytokinesis.
Mitosis thus, is the equational division in which the chromosome number of
the parent is conserved in the daughter cell.
In contrast to mitosis, meiosis occurs in the diploid cells, which are destined to
form gametes. It is called the reduction division since it reduces the chromosome
number by half while making the gametes. In sexual reproduction when the two
gametes fuse the chromosome number is restored to the value in the parent.
Meiosis is divided into two phases – meiosis I and meiosis II. In the first meiotic
division the homologous chromosomes pair to form bivalents, and undergo crossing
over. Meiosis I has a long prophase, which is divided further into five phases.
These are leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, diplotene and diakinesis. During
metaphase I the bivalents arrange on the equatorial plate. This is followed by
anaphase I in which homologous chromosomes move to the opposite poles with
both their chromatids. Each pole receives half the chromosome number of the
parent cell. In telophase I, the nuclear membrane and nucleolus reappear. Meiosis
II is similar to mitosis. During anaphase II the sister chromatids separate. Thus at
the end of meiosis four haploid cells are formed.
EXERCISES
1.
What is the average cell cycle span for a mammalian cell?
2.
Distinguish cytokinesis from karyokinesis.
3.
Describe the events taking place during interphase.
4.
What is Go (quiescent phase) of cell cycle?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 10 - Page 11 :
 130
BIOLOGY
5.
Why is mitosis called equational division?
6.
Name the stage of cell cycle at which one of the following events occur:
(i) Chromosomes are moved to spindle equator.
(ii) Centromere splits and chromatids separate.
(iii) Pairing between homologous chromosomes takes place.
(iv) Crossing over between homologous chromosomes takes place.
7.
Describe the following:
(a) synapsis  (b) bivalent  (c) chiasmata
Draw a diagram to illustrate your answer.
8.
How does cytokinesis in plant cells differ from that in animal cells?
9.
Find examples where the four daughter cells from meiosis are equal in size and
where they are found unequal in size.
10.
Distinguish anaphase of mitosis from anaphase I of meiosis.
11.
List the main differences between mitosis and meiosis.
12.
What is the significance of meiosis?
13.
Discuss with your teacher about
(i) haploid insects and lower plants where cell-division occurs, and
(ii) some haploid cells in higher plants where cell-division does not occur.
14.
Can there be mitosis without DNA replication in ‘S’ phase?
15.
Can there be DNA replication without cell division?
16.
Analyse the events during every stage of cell cycle and notice how the following
two parameters change
(i) number of chromosomes (N) per cell
(ii) amount of DNA content (C) per cell
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 12 - Page 1 :
 RESPIRATION IN PLANTS
153
All of us breathe to live, but why is breathing so essential to life? What
happens when we breathe? Also, do all living organisms, including plants
and microbes, breathe? If so, how?
All living organisms need energy for carrying out daily life activities,
be it absorption, transport, movement, reproduction or even breathing.
Where does all this energy come from? We know we eat food for energy –
but how is this energy taken from food?  How is this energy utilised? Do
all foods give the same amount of energy? Do plants ‘eat’? Where do plants
get their energy from? And micro-organisms – for their energy
requirements, do they eat ‘food’?
You may wonder at the several questions raised above – they may
seem to be very disconnected.  But in reality, the process of breathing is
very much connected to the process of release of energy from food.  Let us
try and understand how this happens.
All the energy required for ‘life’ processes is obtained by oxidation of
some macromolecules that we call ‘food’. Only green plants and
cyanobacteria can prepare their own food; by the process of photosynthesis
they trap light energy and convert it into chemical energy that is stored in
the bonds of carbohydrates like glucose, sucrose and starch.  We must
remember that in green plants too, not all cells, tissues and organs
photosynthesise; only cells containing chloroplasts, that are most often
located in the superficial layers, carry out photosynthesis.  Hence, even
in green plants all other organs, tissues and cells that are non-green,
need food for oxidation. Hence, food has to be translocated to all non-
green parts. Animals are heterotrophic, i.e., they obtain food from plants
RESPIRATION IN PLANTS
CHAPTER  12
12.1 Do Plants
Breathe?
12.2 Glycolysis
12.3 Fermentation
12.4 Aerobic
Respiration
12.5 The
Respiratory
Balance Sheet
12.6 Amphibolic
Pathway
12.7 Respiratory
Quotient
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 12 - Page 2 :
 154
BIOLOGY
directly (herbivores) or indirectly (carnivores). Saprophytes like fungi are
dependent on dead and decaying matter.  What is important to recognise
is that ultimately all the food that is respired for life processes comes from
photosynthesis. This chapter deals with cellular respiration or the
mechanism of breakdown of food materials within the cell to release
energy, and the trapping of this energy for synthesis of ATP.
Photosynthesis, of course, takes place within the chloroplasts (in the
eukaryotes), whereas the breakdown of complex molecules to yield energy
takes place in the cytoplasm and in the mitochondria  (also only in
eukaryotes).  The breaking of the C-C bonds of complex compounds
through oxidation within the cells, leading to release of considerable
amount of energy is called respiration.  The compounds that are oxidised
during this process are known as respiratory substrates. Usually
carbohydrates are oxidised to release energy, but proteins, fats and even
organic acids can be used as respiratory substances in some plants, under
certain conditions.  During oxidation within a cell, all the energy contained
in respiratory substrates is not released free into the cell, or in a single
step. It is released in a series of slow step-wise reactions controlled by
enzymes, and it is trapped as chemical energy in the form of ATP.  Hence,
it is important to understand that the energy released by oxidation in
respiration is not (or rather cannot be) used directly but is used to
synthesise ATP, which is broken down whenever (and wherever) energy
needs to be utilised. Hence, ATP acts as the energy currency of the cell.
This energy trapped in ATP is utilised in various energy-requiring
processes of the organisms, and the carbon skeleton produced during
respiration is used as precursors for biosynthesis of other molecules in
the cell.
12.1
DO PLANTS BREATHE?
Well, the answer to this question is not quite so direct.  Yes, plants require
O2 for respiration to occur and they also give out CO2.  Hence, plants have
systems in place that ensure the availability of O2.  Plants, unlike animals,
have no specialised organs for gaseous exchange but they have stomata
and lenticels for this purpose. There are several reasons why plants can
get along without respiratory organs. First, each plant part takes care of
its own gas-exchange needs.  There is very little transport of gases from
one plant part to another.  Second, plants do not present great demands
for gas exchange.  Roots, stems and leaves respire at rates far lower than
animals do. Only during photosynthesis are large volumes of gases
exchanged and, each leaf is well adapted to take care of its own needs
during these periods. When cells photosynthesise, availability of O2 is not
a problem in these cells since O2 is released within the cell.  Third, the
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 12 - Page 3 :
 RESPIRATION IN PLANTS
155
distance that gases must diffuse even in large, bulky plants is not great.
Each living cell in a plant is located quite close to the surface of the plant.
‘This is true for leaves’, you may ask, ‘but what about thick, woody stems
and roots?’ In stems, the ‘living’ cells are organised in thin layers inside
and beneath the bark. They also have openings called lenticels. The cells
in the interior are dead and provide only mechanical support. Thus, most
cells of a plant have at least a part of their surface in contact with air. This
is also facilitated by the loose packing of parenchyma cells in leaves, stems
and roots, which provide an interconnected network of air spaces.
The complete combustion of glucose, which produces CO2 and H2O
as end products, yields energy most of which is given out as heat.
C H O
O
CO
H O
Energy
6
12
6
2
2
2
6
6
6
+
→

+
+
If this energy is to be useful to the cell, it should be able to utilise it to
synthesise other molecules that the cell requires.  The strategy that the
plant cell uses is to catabolise the glucose molecule in such a way that
not all the liberated energy goes out as heat.  The key is to oxidise glucose
not in one step but in several small steps enabling some steps to be just
large enough such that the energy released can be coupled to ATP
synthesis.  How this is done is, essentially, the story of respiration.
During the process of respiration, oxygen is utilised, and carbon
dioxide, water and energy are released as products. The combustion
reaction requires oxygen. But some cells live where oxygen may or may
not be available. Can you think of such situations (and organisms) where
O2 is not available?   There are sufficient reasons to believe that the first
cells on this planet lived in an atmosphere that lacked oxygen.  Even
among present-day living organisms, we know of several that are adapted
to anaerobic conditions.  Some of these organisms are facultative
anaerobes, while in others the requirement for anaerobic condition is
obligate.  In any case, all living organisms retain the enzymatic machinery
to partially oxidise glucose without the help of oxygen.  This breakdown
of glucose to pyruvic acid is called glycolysis.
12.2
GLYCOLYSIS
The term glycolysis has originated from the Greek words, glycos for sugar,
and lysis for splitting.  The scheme of glycolysis was given by Gustav
Embden, Otto Meyerhof, and J. Parnas, and is often referred to as the
EMP pathway. In anaerobic organisms, it is the only process in respiration.
Glycolysis occurs in the cytoplasm of the cell and is present in all living
organisms.  In this process, glucose undergoes partial oxidation to form
two molecules of pyruvic acid. In plants, this glucose is derived from
sucrose, which is the end product of photosynthesis, or from storage
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 12 - Page 4 :
 156
BIOLOGY
carbohydrates. Sucrose is converted into glucose
and fructose by the enzyme, invertase, and these
two monosaccharides readily enter the glycolytic
pathway. Glucose and fructose are
phosphorylated to give rise to glucose-6-
phosphate by the activity of the enzyme
hexokinase. This phosphorylated form of
glucose then isomerises to produce fructose-6-
phosphate. Subsequent steps of metabolism of
glucose and fructose are same.  The various
steps of glycolysis are depicted in Figure 12.1.
In glycolysis, a chain of ten reactions, under the
control of different enzymes, takes place to
produce pyruvate from glucose. While studying
the steps of glycolysis, please note the steps at
which utilisation or synthesis of ATP or (in this
case) NADH + H+ take place.
ATP is utilised at two steps: first in the
conversion of glucose into glucose 6-phosphate
and second in the conversion of fructose
6-phosphate to fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate.
The fructose 1, 6-bisphosphate is split
into dihydroxyacetone phosphate and
3-phosphoglyceraldehyde (PGAL). We find
that there is one step where NADH + H+ is
formed 
from 
NAD+; 
this 
is 
when
3-phosphoglyceraldehyde (PGAL) is converted
to 1, 3-bisphosphoglycerate (BPGA).  Two
redox-equivalents are removed (in the form of
two hydrogen atoms) from PGAL and transferred
to a molecule of NAD+. PGAL is oxidised and
with inorganic phosphate to get converted into
BPGA. The conversion of BPGA to
3-phosphoglyceric acid (PGA), is also an energy
yielding process; this energy is trapped by the
formation of ATP.  Another ATP is synthesised
during the conversion of PEP to pyruvic acid.
Can you then calculate how many ATP
Can you then calculate how many ATP
Can you then calculate how many ATP
Can you then calculate how many ATP
Can you then calculate how many ATP
molecules are directly synthesised in this
molecules are directly synthesised in this
molecules are directly synthesised in this
molecules are directly synthesised in this
molecules are directly synthesised in this
pathway from one glucose molecule?
pathway from one glucose molecule?
pathway from one glucose molecule?
pathway from one glucose molecule?
pathway from one glucose molecule?
Pyruvic acid is then the key product of
glycolysis. What is the metabolic fate of
pyruvate?  This depends on the cellular need.
Glucose
(6C)
Glucose-6-phosphate
(6C)
Fructose-6-phosphate
(6C)
Fructose1, 6-bisphosphate
(6C)
Triose phosphate
(glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate)
(3C)
Triose phosphate
(Dihydroxy acetone
phosphate)
(3C)
2 × Triose bisphosphate
(1,3 bisphosphoglyceric acid)
(3C)
2 × Triose phosphate
(3-phosphoglyceric acid)
(3C)
2 × 2-phosphoglycerate
2 × phosphoenolpyruvate
2 × Pyruvic acid
(3C)
ADP
ATP
ADP
ATP
ADP
ATP
ADP
NADH+H+
NAD+
H2O
ATP
Figure 12.1   Steps of glycolysis
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 12 - Page 5 :
 RESPIRATION IN PLANTS
157
There are three major ways in which different cells handle pyruvic acid
produced by glycolysis.  These are lactic acid fermentation, alcoholic
fermentation and aerobic respiration. Fermentation takes place under
anaerobic conditions in many prokaryotes and unicellular eukaryotes.
For the complete oxidation of glucose to CO2 and H2O, however, organisms
adopt Krebs’ cycle which is also called as aerobic respiration. This requires
O2 supply.
12.3
FERMENTATION
In fermentation, say by yeast, the incomplete oxidation of glucose is
achieved under anaerobic conditions by sets of reactions where pyruvic
acid is converted to CO2 and ethanol. The enzymes, pyruvic acid
decarboxylase and alcohol dehydrogenase catalyse these reactions. Other
organisms like some bacteria produce lactic acid from pyruvic acid.  The
steps involved are shown in Figure 12.2. In animal cells also, like muscles
during exercise, when oxygen is inadequate for cellular respiration pyruvic
acid is reduced to lactic acid by lactate dehydrogenase.  The reducing
agent is NADH+H+  which is reoxidised to NAD+
in both the processes.
In both lactic acid and alcohol
fermentation not much energy is released; less
than seven per cent of the energy in glucose is
released and not all of it is trapped as high
energy bonds of ATP.  Also, the processes are
hazardous – either acid or alcohol is produced.
What is the net ATPs that is synthesised
(calculate how many ATP are synthesised and
deduct the number of ATP utilised during
glycolysis) when one molecule of glucose is
fermented to alcohol or lactic acid?  Yeasts
poison themselves to death when the
concentration of alcohol reaches about 13 per
cent. What then would be 
What then would be 
What then would be 
What then would be 
What then would be the 
the 
the 
the 
the maximum
maximum
maximum
maximum
maximum
concentration of alcohol in beverages that
concentration of alcohol in beverages that
concentration of alcohol in beverages that
concentration of alcohol in beverages that
concentration of alcohol in beverages that
are naturally fermented?
are naturally fermented?
are naturally fermented?
are naturally fermented?
are naturally fermented? How do you think
alcoholic beverages of alcohol content greater
than this concentration are obtained?
What then is the process by which
organisms can carry out complete oxidation of
glucose and extract the energy stored to
Figure 12.2 Major pathways of anaerobic
respiration
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 12 - Page 6 :
 158
BIOLOGY
synthesise a larger number of ATP molecules needed for cellular
metabolism?  In eukaryotes these steps take place within the mitochondria
and this requires O2. Aerobic respiration is the process that leads to a
complete oxidation of organic substances in the presence of oxygen, and
releases CO2, water and a large amount of energy present in the substrate.
This type of respiration is most common in higher organisms. We will
look at these processes in the next section.
12.4
AEROBIC RESPIRATION
For aerobic respiration to take place within the mitochondria, the final
product of glycolysis, pyruvate is transported from the cytoplasm into
the mitochondria.  The crucial events in aerobic respiration are:
•
The complete oxidation of pyruvate by the stepwise removal of all
the hydrogen atoms, leaving three molecules of CO2.
•
The passing on of the electrons removed as part of the hydrogen
atoms to molecular O2  with simultaneous synthesis of ATP.
What is interesting to note is that the first process takes place in the
matrix of the mitochondria while the second process is located on the
inner membrane of the mitochondria.
Pyruvate, which is formed by the glycolytic catabolism of carbohydrates
in the cytosol, after it enters mitochondrial matrix undergoes oxidative
decarboxylation by a complex set of reactions catalysed by pyruvic
dehydrogenase. The reactions catalysed by pyruvic dehydrogenase require
the participation of several coenzymes, including NAD+ and  Coenzyme A.
Pyruvic acid
CoA
NAD
Mg
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
+
+

→

+
+
2

+
+
+
+
Acetyl CoA
CO
NADH
H
2
During this process, two molecules of NADH are produced from the
metabolism of two molecules of pyruvic acid (produced from one glucose
molecule during glycolysis).
The acetyl CoA then enters a cyclic pathway, tricarboxylic acid cycle,
more commonly called as Krebs’ cycle after the scientist Hans Krebs who
first elucidated it.
12.4.1 Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle
The TCA cycle starts with the condensation of acetyl group with oxaloacetic
acid (OAA) and water to yield citric acid (Figure 12.3). The reaction is
catalysed by the enzyme citrate synthase and a molecule of CoA is released.
Citrate is then isomerised to isocitrate.  It is followed by two successive
steps of decarboxylation, leading to the formation of α-ketoglutaric acid
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 12 - Page 7 :
 RESPIRATION IN PLANTS
159
Pyruvic acid
NAD
FAD
H O
ADP
Pi
Mitochondrial Matrix
+
+
+
+
+

→

+
+
4
2
2

+
+
+
3
4
4
2
CO
NADH
H
and then succinyl-CoA.  In the remaining steps
of citric acid cycle, succinyl-CoA is oxidised to
OAA allowing the cycle to continue. During the
conversion of succinyl-CoA to succinic acid a
molecule of GTP is synthesised. This is a
substrate level phosphorylation.  In a coupled
reaction GTP is converted to GDP with the
simultaneous synthesis of ATP from ADP.
Also there are three points in the cycle where
NAD+ is reduced to NADH + H+ and one point
where FAD+ is reduced to FADH 2. The
continued oxidation of acetyl CoA via the TCA
cycle requires the continued replenishment of
oxaloacetic acid, the first member of the cycle.
In addition it also requires regeneration of
NAD+ and FAD+ from NADH and FADH2
respectively. The summary equation for this
phase of respiration may be written as follows:
+
+
2
FADH
ATP
We have till now seen that glucose has been broken down to release
CO2 and eight molecules of NADH + H+; two of  FADH2 have been
synthesised besides just two molecules of ATP in TCA cycle.  You may be
wondering why we have been discussing respiration at all – neither O2
has come into the picture nor the promised large number of ATP has yet
been synthesised. Also what is the role of the NADH + H+ and FADH2 that
is synthesised? Let us now understand the role of O2 in respiration and
how ATP is synthesised.
12.4.2 Electron Transport System (ETS) and Oxidative
Phosphorylation
The following steps in the respiratory process are to release and utilise
the energy stored in NADH+H+ and FADH2.  This is accomplished when
they are oxidised through the electron transport system and the electrons
are passed on to O2 resulting in the formation of H2O.  The metabolic
pathway through which the electron passes from one carrier to another,
is called the electron transport system
electron transport system
electron transport system
electron transport system
electron transport system (ETS) (Figure 12.4) and it is
present in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Electrons from NADH
Figure 12.3   The Citric acid cycle
Pyruvate
(3C)
Acetyl coenzyme A
(2C)
Citric acid
(6C)
Oxaloacetic acid
(4C)
CO2
NAD+
NADH+H+
NADH+H+
NAD+
NAD+
CO2
CITRIC ACID CYCLE
α-ketoglutaric acid
(5C)
NADH+H+
GDP
GTP
Succinic acid
(4C)
Malic acid
(4C)
FADH2
FAD+
CoA
NAD+
NADH+H+
CO2
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 12 - Page 8 :
 160
BIOLOGY
produced in the mitochondrial matrix
during citric acid cycle are oxidised by
an NADH dehydrogenase (complex I),
and electrons are then transferred to
ubiquinone located within the inner
membrane. Ubiquinone also receives
reducing equivalents via FADH2 (complex
II) that is generated during oxidation of
succinate in the citric acid cycle. The
reduced ubiquinone (ubiquinol) is then
oxidised with the transfer of electrons to
cytochrome c via cytochrome bc 1
complex (complex III). Cytochrome c is a
small protein attached to the outer
surface of the inner membrane and acts
as a mobile carrier for transfer of
electrons between complex III and IV.
Complex IV refers to cytochrome c
oxidase complex containing cytochromes
a and a3, and two copper centres.
When the electrons pass from one
carrier to another via complex I to IV in
the electron transport chain, they are
coupled to ATP synthase (complex V) for
the production of ATP from ADP and
inorganic phosphate. The number of ATP
molecules synthesised depends on the
nature of the electron donor. Oxidation
of one molecule of NADH gives rise to 3
molecules of ATP, while that of one
molecule of FADH2 produces 2 molecules
of ATP. Although the aerobic process of
respiration takes place only in the
presence of oxygen, the role of oxygen is
limited to the terminal stage of the
process.  Yet, the presence of oxygen is
vital, since it drives the whole process by removing hydrogen from the
system. Oxygen acts as the final hydrogen acceptor. Unlike
photophosphorylation where it is the light energy that is utilised for the
production of proton gradient required for phosphorylation, in respiration
it is the energy of oxidation-reduction utilised for the same process. It is
for this reason that the process is called oxidative phosphorylation.
You have already studied about the mechanism of membrane-linked
ATP synthesis as explained by chemiosmotic hypothesis in the earlier
chapter.  As mentioned earlier, the energy released during the electron
Figure 12.4 Electron Transport System (ETS)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 12 - Page 9 :
 RESPIRATION IN PLANTS
161
transport system is utilised in synthesising ATP
with the help of ATP synthase (complex V).  This
complex consists of two major components, F1
and F0 (Figure 12.5).  The F1 headpiece is a
peripheral membrane protein complex and
contains the site for synthesis of ATP from ADP
and inorganic phosphate. F0 is an integral
membrane protein complex that forms the
channel through which protons cross the inner
membrane.  The passage of protons through
the channel is coupled to the catalytic site of
the F1 component for the production of ATP.
For each ATP produced, 4H+ passes through
F0 from the intermembrane space to the matrix
down the electrochemical proton gradient.
12.5 THE RESPIRATORY BALANCE SHEET
It is possible to make calculations of the net gain of ATP for every glucose
molecule  oxidised; but in reality this can remain only a theoretical exercise.
These calculations can be made only on certain assumptions that:
•
There is a sequential, orderly pathway functioning, with one
substrate forming the next and with glycolysis, TCA cycle and ETS
pathway following one after another.
•
The NADH synthesised in glycolysis is transferred into the
mitochondria and undergoes oxidative phosphorylation.
•
None of the intermediates in the pathway are utilised to synthesise
any other compound.
•
Only glucose is being respired – no other alternative substrates are
entering in the pathway at any of the intermediary stages.
But this kind of assumptions are not really valid in a living system; all
pathways work simultaneously and do not take place one after another;
substrates enter the pathways and are withdrawn from it as and when
necessary; ATP is utilised as and when needed;  enzymatic rates are
controlled by multiple means.  Yet, it is useful to do this exercise to
appreciate the beauty and efficiency of the living system in extraction
and storing energy. Hence, there can be a net gain of 38 ATP molecules
during aerobic respiration of one molecule of glucose.
Figure 12.5  Diagramatic presentation of ATP
synthesis in mitochondria
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 12 - Page 10 :
 162
BIOLOGY
Now let us  compare  fermentation and aerobic respiration:
• Fermentation accounts for only a partial breakdown of glucose
whereas in aerobic respiration it is completely degraded to CO2 and
H2O.
• In fermentation there is a net gain of only two molecules of ATP for
each molecule of glucose degraded to pyruvic acid whereas many
more molecules of ATP are generated under aerobic conditions.
• NADH is oxidised to NAD+ rather slowly in fermentation, however
the reaction is very vigorous in case of aerobic respiration.
12.6
AMPHIBOLIC PATHWAY
Glucose is the favoured substrate for respiration.  All carbohydrates are
usually first converted into glucose before they are used for respiration.
Other substrates can also be respired, as has been mentioned earlier, but
then they do not enter the respiratory pathway at the first step. See Figure
12.6 to see the points of entry of different substrates in the respiratory
pathway. Fats would need to be broken down into glycerol and fatty acids
first. If fatty acids were to be respired they would first be degraded to
acetyl CoA and enter the pathway. Glycerol would enter the pathway
after being converted to PGAL. The proteins would be degraded by
proteases and the individual amino acids (after deamination) depending
on their structure would enter the pathway at some stage within the Krebs’
cycle or even as pyruvate or acetyl CoA.
Since respiration involves breakdown of substrates, the respiratory
process has traditionally been considered a catabolic process and the
respiratory pathway as a catabolic pathway.  But is this understanding
correct?  We have discussed above, at which points in the respiratory
pathway different substrates would enter if they were to be respired and
used to derive energy. What is important to recognise is that it is these very
compounds that would be withdrawn from the respiratory pathway for the
synthesis of the said substrates. Hence, fatty acids would be broken down
to acetyl CoA before entering the respiratory pathway when it is used as a
substrate. But when the organism needs to synthesise fatty acids, acetyl
CoA would be withdrawn from the respiratory pathway for it. Hence, the
respiratory pathway comes into the picture both during breakdown and
synthesis of fatty acids. Similarly, during breakdown and synthesis of
protein too, respiratory intermediates form the link. Breaking down
processes within the living organism is catabolism, and synthesis is
anabolism.  Because the respiratory pathway is involved in both anabolism
and catabolism, it would hence be better to consider the respiratory pathway
as an amphibolic pathway rather than as a catabolic one.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 12 - Page 11 :
 RESPIRATION IN PLANTS
163
12.7
RESPIRATORY QUOTIENT
Let us now look at another aspect of respiration. As you know, during
aerobic respiration, O2 is consumed and CO2 is released. The ratio of the
volume of CO2 evolved to the volume of O2 consumed in respiration is
called the respiratory quotient (RQ) or respiratory ratio.
RQ
volumeof CO evolved
volumeof O consumed
=
2
2
The respiratory quotient depends upon the type of respiratory
substrate used during respiration.
When carbohydrates are used as substrate and are completely
oxidised, the RQ will be 1, because equal amounts of CO2 and O2 are
evolved and consumed, respectively, as shown in the equation below :
Figure 12.6 Interrelationship among metabolic pathways showing respiration
mediated breakdown of different organic molecules to CO2 and H20
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 12 - Page 12 :
 164
BIOLOGY
C H O
O
CO
H O
Energy
6
12
6
2
2
2
6
6
6
+
→

+
+
RQ
CO
O
=
=
6
6
1 0
2
2
.
When fats are used in respiration, the RQ is less than 1. Calculations
for a fatty acid, tripalmitin, if used as a substrate is shown:
2
145
102
98
51
98
6
2
2
2
(
)
C H O
O
CO
H O
energy
+
→

+
+
        Tripalmitin
RQ
CO
O
=
=
102
145
0 7
2
2
.
When proteins are respiratory substrates the ratio would be about
0.9.
What is important to recognise is that in living organisms respiratory
substrates are often more than one; pure proteins or fats are never used
as respiratory substrates.
SUMMARY
Plants unlike animals have no special systems for breathing or gaseous exchange.
Stomata and lenticels allow gaseous exchange by diffusion. Almost all living cells
in a plant have their surfaces exposed to air.
The breaking of C-C bonds of complex organic molecules by oxidation cells
leading to the release of a lot of energy is called cellular respiration. Glucose is the
favoured substrate for respiration. Fats and proteins can also be broken down to
yield energy. The initial stage of cellular respiration takes place in the cytoplasm.
Each glucose molecule is broken through a series of enzyme catalysed reactions
into two molecules of pyruvic acid. This process is called glycolysis. The fate of the
pyruvate depends on the availability of oxygen and the organism. Under anaerobic
conditions either lactic acid fermentation or alcohol fermentation occurs.
Fermentation takes place under anaerobic conditions in many prokaryotes,
unicellular eukaryotes and in germinating seeds. In eukaryotic organisms aerobic
respiration occurs  in the presence of oxygen. Pyruvic acid is transported into the
mitochondria where it is converted into acetyl CoA with the release of CO2. Acetyl
CoA then enters the tricarboxylic acid pathway or Krebs’ cycle operating in the
matrix of the mitochondria. NADH + H+ and FADH2 are generated in the Krebs’
cycle. The energy in these molecules as well as that in the NADH + H+ synthesised
during glycolysis are used to synthesise ATP. This is accomplished through a
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 12 - Page 13 :
 RESPIRATION IN PLANTS
165
system of electron carriers called electron transport system (ETS) located on the
inner membrane of the mitochondria. The electrons, as they move through the
system, release enough energy that are trapped to synthesise ATP. This is called
oxidative phosphorylation. In this process O2 is the ultimate acceptor of electrons
and it gets reduced to water.
The respiratory pathway is an amphibolic pathway as it involves both anabolism
and catabolism. The respiratory quotient depends upon the type of respiratory
substance used during respiration.
EXERCISES
1.
Differentiate between
(a) Respiration and Combustion
(b) Glycolysis and Krebs’ cycle
(c) Aerobic respiration and Fermentation
2.
What are respiratory substrates? Name the most common respiratory substrate.
3.
Give the schematic representation of glycolysis?
4.
What are the main steps in aerobic respiration? Where does it take place?
5.
Give the schematic representation of an overall view of Krebs’ cycle.
6.
Explain ETS.
7.
Distinguish between the following:
(a) Aerobic respiration and Anaerobic respiration
(b) Glycolysis and Fermentation
(c) Glycolysis and Citric acid Cycle
8.
What are the assumptions made during the calculation of net gain of ATP?
9.
Discuss “The respiratory pathway is an amphibolic pathway.”
10.
Define RQ. What is its value for fats?
11.
What is oxidative phosphorylation?
12.
What is the significance of step-wise release of energy in respiration?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 1 :
 UNIT 4
The description of structure and variation of living organisms over a
period of time, ended up as two, apparently irreconcilable perspectives
on biology. The two perspectives essentially rested on two levels of
organisation of life forms and phenomena. One described at organismic
and above level of organisation while the second described at cellular
and molecular level of organisation. The first resulted in ecology and
related disciplines. The second resulted in physiology and biochemistry.
Description of physiological processes, in flowering plants as an
example, is what is given in the chapters in this unit. The processes of
photosynthesis, respiration and ultimately plant growth and
development are described in molecular terms but in the context of
cellular activities and even at organism level. Wherever appropriate,
the relation of the physiological processes to environment is also
discussed.
PLANT PHYSIOLOGY
Chapter 11
Photosynthesis in Higher
Plants
Chapter 12
Respiration in Plants
Chapter 13
Plant Growth and
Development
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 2 :
 MELVIN CALVIN born in Minnesota in April, 1911, received his
Ph.D. in Chemistry from the University of Minnesota. He served
as Professor of Chemistry at the University of California,
Berkeley.
Just after world war II, when the world was under shock
after the Hiroshima-Nagasaki bombings, and seeing the ill-
effects of radio-activity, Calvin and co-workers put radio-
activity to beneficial use. He along with J.A. Bassham studied
reactions in green plants forming sugar and other substances
from raw materials like carbon dioxide, water and minerals
by labelling the carbon dioxide with C14. Calvin proposed that
plants change light energy to chemical energy by transferring
an electron in an organised array of pigment molecules and
other substances. The mapping of the pathway of carbon
assimilation in photosynthesis earned him Nobel Prize in 1961.
The principles of photosynthesis as established by Calvin
are, at present, being used in studies on renewable resource
for energy and materials and basic studies in solar energy
research.
Melvin Calvin
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 3 :
 PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS
133
All animals including human beings depend on plants for their food. Have
you ever wondered from where plants get their food?  Green plants, in fact,
have to make or rather synthesise the food they need and all other organisms
depend on them for their needs. The green plants make or rather synthesise
the food they need through photosynthesis and are therefore called autotrophs.
You have already learnt that the autotrophic nutrition is found only in plants
and all other organisms that depend on the green plants for food are
heterotrophs. Green plants carry out ‘photosynthesis’, a physico-chemical
process by which they use light energy to drive the synthesis of organic
compounds.  Ultimately, all living forms on earth depend on sunlight for
energy.  The use of energy from sunlight by plants doing photosynthesis is
the basis of life on earth.  Photosynthesis is important due to two reasons: it
is the primary source of all food on earth. It is also responsible for the release
of oxygen into the atmosphere by green plants. Have you ever thought what
would happen if there were no oxygen to breath? This chapter focusses on
the structure of the photosynthetic machinery and the various reactions
that transform light energy into chemical energy.
11.1
WHAT DO WE KNOW?
Let us try to find out what we already know about photosynthesis.  Some
simple experiments you may have done in the earlier classes have shown
that chlorophyll (green pigment of the leaf), light and CO2 are required for
photosynthesis to occur.
You may have carried out the experiment to look for starch formation
in two leaves – a variegated leaf or a leaf that was partially covered with
black paper, and exposed to light.  On testing these leaves for the presence
of starch it was clear that photosynthesis occurred only in the green parts
of the leaves in the presence of light.
PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS
CHAPTER  11
11.1
What do we
Know?
11.2
Early
Experiments
11.3
Where does
Photosynthesis
take place?
11.4
How many
Pigments are
involved in
Photosynthesis?
11.5
What is Light
Reaction?
11.6
The Electron
Transport
11.7
Where are the
ATP and NADPH
Used?
11.8
The C4 Pathway
11.9
hotorespiration
11.10 Factors
affecting
Photosynthesis
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 4 :
 134
BIOLOGY
Another experiment you may have carried out
where a part of a leaf is enclosed in a test tube
containing some KOH soaked cotton (which
absorbs CO2), while the other half is exposed to air.
The setup is then placed in light for some time. On
testing for the presence of starch later in the two
parts of the leaf, you must have found that the
exposed part of the leaf tested positive for starch
while the portion that was in the tube, tested
negative. This showed that CO2 was required for
photosynthesis. Can you explain how this
conclusion could be drawn?
11.2 EARLY EXPERIMENTS
It is interesting to learn about those simple
experiments that led to a gradual development in
our understanding of photosynthesis.
Joseph Priestley (1733-1804) in 1770
performed a series of experiments that revealed the
essential role of air in the growth of green plants.
Priestley, you may recall, discovered oxygen in
1774. Priestley observed that a candle burning in
a closed space – a bell jar, soon gets extinguished
(Figure 11.1 a, b, c, d).  Similarly, a mouse would
soon suffocate in a closed space. He concluded that
a burning candle or an animal that breathe the air,
both somehow, damage the air.  But when he placed a mint plant in the
same bell jar, he found that the mouse stayed alive and the candle
continued to burn.  Priestley hypothesised as follows: Plants restore to
the air whatever breathing animals and burning candles remove.
Can you imagine how Priestley would have conducted the experiment
using a candle and a plant?  Remember, he would need to rekindle the
candle to test whether it burns after a few days. How many different
ways can you think of to light the candle without disturbing the set-up?
Using a similar setup as the one used by Priestley, but by placing it
once in the dark and once in the sunlight, Jan Ingenhousz (1730-1799)
showed that sunlight is essential to the plant process that somehow
purifies the air fouled by burning candles or breathing animals.
Ingenhousz in an elegant experiment with an aquatic plant showed that
in bright sunlight, small bubbles were formed around the green parts
while in the dark they did not.  Later he identified these bubbles to be of
oxygen.  Hence he showed that it is only the green part of the plants that
could release oxygen.
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Figure 11.1 Priestley’s experiment
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 5 :
 PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS
135
It was not until about 1854 that Julius von Sachs provided evidence
for production of glucose when plants grow. Glucose is usually stored as
starch. His later studies showed that the green substance in plants
(chlorophyll as we know it now) is located in special bodies (later called
chloroplasts) within plant cells. He found that the green parts in plants is
where glucose is made, and that the glucose is usually stored as starch.
Now consider the interesting experiments done by T.W Engelmann
(1843 – 1909).  Using a prism he split light into its spectral components
and then illuminated a green alga, Cladophora, placed in a suspension
of aerobic bacteria. The bacteria were used to detect the sites of O2
evolution. He observed that the bacteria accumulated mainly in the region
of blue and red light of the split spectrum. A first action spectrum of
photosynthesis was thus described. It resembles roughly the absorption
spectra of chlorophyll a and b (discussed  in section 11.4).
By the middle of the nineteenth century the key features of plant
photosynthesis were known, namely, that plants could use light energy
to make carbohydrates from CO2 and water.  The empirical equation
representing the total process of photosynthesis for oxygen evolving
organisms was then understood as:
CO
H O
CH O
O
Light
2
2
2
2
+

→

+
[
]
where [CH2O] represented a carbohydrate (e.g., glucose, a six-carbon
sugar).
A milestone contribution to the understanding of photosynthesis was
that made by a microbiologist, Cornelius van Niel (1897-1985), who,
based on his studies of purple and green bacteria, demonstrated that
photosynthesis is essentially a light-dependent reaction in which
hydrogen from a suitable oxidisable compound reduces carbon dioxide
to carbohydrates. This can be expressed by:
2
2
2
2
2
2
H A
CO
A
CH O
H O
Light
+

→

+
+
In green plants H2O is the hydrogen donor and is oxidised to O2. Some
organisms do not release O2 during photosynthesis.  When H2S, instead
is the hydrogen donor for purple and green sulphur bacteria, the
‘oxidation’ product is sulphur or sulphate depending on the organism
and not O2. Hence, he inferred that the O2 evolved by the green plant
comes from H2O, not from carbon dioxide. This was later proved by using
radioisotopic techniques.  The correct equation, that would represent  the
overall process of photosynthesis is therefore:
6
12
6
6
2
2
6
12
6
2
2
CO
H O
C H O
H O
O
Light
+

→

+
+
where C6 H12 O6 represents glucose. The O2 released is from water; this
was proved using radio isotope techniques. Note that this is not a single
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 6 :
 136
BIOLOGY
reaction but description of a multistep process called photosynthesis.
Can you explain why twelve molecules of water as substrate are used
in the equation given above?
11.3
WHERE DOES PHOTOSYNTHESIS TAKE PLACE?
You would of course answer: in ‘the green leaf’ or ‘in the chloroplasts’,
based on what you earlier read in Chapter 8. You are definitely right.
Photosynthesis does take place in the green leaves of plants but it does so
also in other green parts of the plants. Can you name some other parts
where you think photosynthesis may occur?
You would recollect from previous unit that the mesophyll cells in the
leaves, have a large number of chloroplasts. Usually the chloroplasts align
themselves along the walls of the mesophyll cells, such that they get the
optimum quantity of the incident light. When do you think the
chloroplasts will be aligned with their flat surfaces parallel to the walls?
When would they be perpendicular to the incident light?
You have studied the structure of chloroplast in Chapter 8. Within
the chloroplast there is membranous system consisting of grana, the
stroma lamellae, and the matrix stroma (Figure 11.2). There is a clear
division of labour within the chloroplast. The membrane system is
responsible for trapping the light energy and also for the synthesis of ATP
and NADPH. In stroma, enzymatic reactions synthesise sugar, which in
turn forms starch. The former set of reactions, since they are directly light
driven are called light reactions (photochemical reactions). The latter
are not directly light driven but are dependent on the products of light
reactions (ATP and NADPH). Hence, to distinguish the latter they are called,
by convention, as dark reactions (carbon reactions). However, this should
not be construed to mean that they occur in darkness or that they are not
light-dependent.
Figure 11.2 Diagrammatic representation of an electron micrograph of a section of
chloroplast
Outer membrane
Inner membrane
Stromal lamella
Grana
Stroma
Ribosomes
Starch granule
Lipid droplet
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 7 :
 PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS
137
11.4
HOW MANY TYPES OF PIGMENTS ARE
INVOLVED IN PHOTOSYNTHESIS?
Looking at plants have you ever wondered why
and how there are so many shades of green in
their leaves – even in the same plant? We can
look for an answer to this question by trying to
separate the leaf pigments of any green  plant
through 
paper 
chromatography. 
A
chromatographic separation of the leaf pigments
shows that the colour that we see in leaves is
not due to a single pigment but due to four
pigments: Chlorophyll aaaaa (bright or blue green
in the chromatogram), chlorophyll bbbbb (yellow
green), xanthophylls (yellow) and carotenoids
(yellow to yellow-orange).  Let us now see what
roles various pigments play in photosynthesis.
Pigments are substances that have an ability
to absorb light, at specific wavelengths. Can you
guess which is the most abundant plant
pigment in the world? Let us study the graph
showing the ability of chlorophyll a pigment to
absorb lights of different wavelengths (Figure
11.3 a). Of course, you are familiar with the
wavelength of the visible spectrum of light as
well as the VIBGYOR.
From Figure 11.3a can you determine the
wavelength (colour of light) at which chlorophyll
a shows the maximum absorption? Does it
show another absorption peak at any other
wavelengths too? If yes, which one?
Now look at Figure 11.3b showing the
wavelengths at which maximum photosynthesis
occurs in a plant. Can you see that the
wavelengths at which there is maximum
absorption by chlorophyll a, i.e., in the blue and
the red regions, also shows higher rate of
photosynthesis. Hence, we can conclude that
chlorophyll a is the chief pigment associated
with photosynthesis. But by looking at Figure
11.3c  can you say that there is a complete one-
to-one overlap between the absorption
spectrum of chlorophyll a and the action
spectrum of photosynthesis?
Figure 11.3a Graph showing the absorption
spectrum of chlorophyll a, b and
the carotenoids
Figure 11.3b Graph 
showing 
action
spectrum of photosynthesis
Figure 11.3c Graph 
showing 
action
spectrum of photosynthesis
superimposed on absorption
spectrum of chlorophyll a
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 8 :
 138
BIOLOGY
These graphs, together, show that most of the photosynthesis takes
place in the blue and red regions of the spectrum; some photosynthesis
does take place at the other wavelengths of the visible spectrum.  Let us
see how this happens. Though chlorophyll is the major pigment
responsible for trapping light, other thylakoid pigments like chlorophyll
b, xanthophylls and carotenoids, which are called accessory pigments,
also absorb light and transfer the energy to chlorophyll a. Indeed, they
not only enable a wider range of wavelength of incoming light to be utilised
for photosyntesis but also protect chlorophyll a from photo-oxidation.
11.5
WHAT IS LIGHT REACTION?
Light reactions or the ‘Photochemical’ phase
include light absorption, water splitting, oxygen
release, and the formation of high-energy
chemical intermediates, ATP and NADPH.
Several protein complexes are involved in the
process. The pigments are organised into two
discrete photochemical light harvesting
complexes (LHC) within the Photosystem I (PS
I) and Photosystem II (PS II).  These are named
in the sequence of their discovery, and not in the
sequence in which they function during the light
reaction. The LHC are  made up of hundreds of
pigment molecules bound to proteins. Each
photosystem has all the pigments (except one
molecule of chlorophyll a) forming a light
harvesting system also called antennae (Figure
11.4). These pigments help to make
photosynthesis more efficient by absorbing
different wavelengths of light. The single chlorophyll a molecule forms the
reaction centre. The reaction centre is different in both the photosystems.
In PS I the reaction centre chlorophyll a has an absorption peak at 700
nm, hence is called P700, while in PS II it has absorption maxima at 680
nm, and is called P680.
11.6
THE ELECTRON TRANSPORT
In photosystem II the reaction centre chlorophyll a absorbs 680 nm
wavelength of red light causing electrons to become excited and jump
into an orbit farther from the atomic nucleus. These electrons are picked
up by an electron acceptor which passes them to an electrons transport
Photon
Reaction
centre
Pigment
molecules
Primary acceptor
Figure 11.4 The light harvesting complex
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 9 :
 PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS
139
system consisting of cytochromes (Figure
11.5). This movement of electrons is downhill,
in terms of an oxidation-reduction or redox
potential scale. The electrons are not used up
as they pass through the electron transport
chain, but are passed on to the pigments of
photosystem PS I. Simultaneously, electrons
in the reaction centre of PS I are also excited
when they receive red light of wavelength 700
nm and are transferred to another accepter
molecule that has a greater redox potential.
These electrons then are moved downhill again,
this time to a molecule of energy-rich NADP+.
The addition of these electrons reduces NADP+
to NADPH + H+.  This whole scheme of transfer
of electrons, starting from the PS II, uphill to
the acceptor, down the electron transport chain
to PS I, excitation of electrons, transfer to
another acceptor, and finally down hill to NADP+ reducing it to NADPH +
H+ is called the Z scheme, due to its characterstic shape (Figure 11.5).
This shape is formed when all the carriers are placed in a sequence on a
redox potential scale.
11.6.1 Splitting of Water
You would then ask, How does PS II supply electrons continuously? The
electrons that were moved from photosystem II must be replaced. This is
achieved by electrons available due to splitting of water. The splitting of
water is associated with the PS II; water is split into 2H+, [O] and electrons.
This creates oxygen, one of the net products of photosynthesis. The
electrons needed to replace those removed from photosystem I are provided
by photosystem II.
2
4
4
2
2
H O
H
O
e

→

+
+
+
−
We need to emphasise here that the water splitting complex is associated
with the PS II, which itself is physically located on the inner side of the
membrane of the thylakoid. Then, where are the protons and O2 formed
likely to be released – in the lumen? or on the outer side of the membrane?
11.6.2 Cyclic and Non-cyclic Photo-phosphorylation
Living organisms have the capability of extracting energy from oxidisable
substances and store this in the form of bond energy. Special substances like
ATP, carry this energy in their chemical bonds. The process through which
Electron
transport
system
-
-
e acceptor
e acceptor
Light
Photosystem II
Photosystem I
NADPH
NADP+
LHC
LHC
H O        2e + 2H  + [O]
2
-
+
ADP+iP
ATP
Figure 11.5 Z scheme of light reaction
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 10 :
 140
BIOLOGY
ATP is synthesised by cells (in mitochondria and
chloroplasts) is named phosphorylation. Photo-
phosphorylation is the synthesis of ATP from
ADP and inorganic phosphate in the presence of
light. When the two photosystems work in a
series, first PS II and then the PS I, a process called
non-cyclic photo-phosphorylation occurs. The
two photosystems are connected through an
electron transport chain, as seen earlier – in the
Z scheme. Both ATP and NADPH + H+  are
synthesised by this kind of electron flow (Figure
11.5).
When only PS I is functional, the electron is
circulated within the photosystem and the
phosphorylation occurs due to cyclic flow of
electrons (Figure 11.6). A possible location
where this could be happening is in the stroma
lamellae.  While the membrane or lamellae of the grana have both PS I
and PS II the stroma lamellae membranes lack PS II as well as NADP
reductase enzyme. The excited electron does not pass on to NADP+ but is
cycled back to the PS I complex through the electron transport chain
(Figure 11.6).  The cyclic flow hence, results only in the synthesis of ATP,
but not of NADPH + H+. Cyclic photophosphorylation also occurs when
only light of wavelengths beyond 680 nm are available for excitation.
11.6.3 Chemiosmotic Hypothesis
Let us now try and understand how actually ATP is synthesised in the
chloroplast. The chemiosmotic hypothesis has been put forward to explain
the mechanism. Like in respiration, in photosynthesis too, ATP synthesis is
linked to development of a proton gradient across a membrane. This time
these are the membranes of thylakoid. There is one difference though, here
the proton accumulation is towards the inside of the membrane, i.e., in the
lumen. In respiration, protons accumulate in the intermembrane space of
the mitochondria when electrons move through the ETS (Chapter 12).
Let us understand what causes the proton gradient across the
membrane. We need to consider again the processes that take place during
the activation of electrons and their transport to determine the steps that
cause a proton gradient to develop (Figure 11.7).
(a) Since splitting of the water molecule takes place on the inner side of
the membrane, the protons or hydrogen ions that are produced by
the splitting of water accumulate within the lumen of the thylakoids.
Figure 11.6 Cyclic photophosphorylation
Photosystem I
Light
e- acceptor
Electron
transport
system
Chlorophyll
P 700
ADP+iP
ATP
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 11 :
 PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS
141
(b) As electrons move through the photosystems, protons are transported
across the membrane.  This happens because the primary accepter of
electron which is located towards the outer side of the membrane
transfers its electron not to an electron carrier but to an H carrier.
Hence, this molecule removes a proton from the stroma while
transporting an electron.  When this molecule passes on its electron
to the electron carrier on the inner side of the membrane, the proton
is released into the inner side or the lumen side of the membrane.
(c) The NADP reductase enzyme is located on the stroma side of the
membrane.  Along with electrons that come from the acceptor of
electrons of PS I, protons are necessary for the reduction of NADP+ to
NADPH+ H+.  These protons are also removed from the stroma.
Hence, within the chloroplast, protons in the stroma decrease in
number, while in the lumen there is accumulation of protons.  This creates
a proton gradient across the thylakoid membrane as well as a measurable
decrease in pH in the lumen.
Why are we so interested in the proton gradient?  This gradient is
important because it is the breakdown of this gradient that leads to the
synthesis of ATP.  The gradient is broken down due to the movement of
protons across the membrane to the stroma through the transmembrane
Figure 11.7 ATP synthesis through chemiosmosis
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 12 :
 142
BIOLOGY
channel of the CF0 of the ATP synthase. The ATP synthase enzyme consists
of two parts: one called the CF0 is embedded in the thylakoid membrane
and forms a transmembrane channel that carries out facilitated diffusion
of protons across the membrane. The other portion is called CF1 and
protrudes on the outer surface of the thylakoid membrane on the side
that faces the stroma. The break down of the gradient provides enough
energy to cause a conformational change in the CF1 particle of the ATP
synthase, which makes the enzyme synthesise several molecules of energy-
packed ATP.
Chemiosmosis requires a membrane, a proton pump, a proton
gradient and ATP synthase. Energy is used to pump protons across a
membrane, to create a gradient or a high concentration of protons within
the thylakoid lumen. ATP synthase has a channel that allows diffusion of
protons back across the membrane; this releases enough energy to activate
ATP synthase enzyme that catalyses the formation of ATP.
Along with the NADPH produced by the movement of electrons, the
ATP will be used immediately in the biosynthetic  reaction taking place in
the stroma, responsible for fixing CO2, and synthesis of sugars.
11.7
WHERE ARE THE ATP AND NADPH USED?
We learnt that the products of light reaction are ATP, NADPH and O2. Of
these O2 diffuses out of the chloroplast while ATP and NADPH are used to
drive the processes leading to the synthesis of food, more accurately, sugars.
This is the biosynthetic phase of photosynthesis. This process does not
directly depend on the presence of light but is dependent on the products
of the light reaction, i.e., ATP and NADPH, besides CO2 and H2O. You may
wonder how this could be verified; it is simple: immediately after light
becomes unavailable, the biosynthetic process continues for some time,
and then stops. If then, light is made available, the synthesis starts again.
Can we, hence, say that calling the biosynthetic phase as the dark
dark
dark
dark
dark
reaction
reaction
reaction
reaction
reaction is a misnomer? Discuss this amongst yourselves.
Let us now see how the ATP and NADPH are used in the biosynthetic
phase. We saw earlier that CO2 is combined with H2O to produce (CH2O)n
or sugars. It was of interest to scientists to find out how this reaction
proceeded, or rather what was the first product formed when CO2 is taken
into a reaction or fixed. Just after world war II, among the several efforts
to put radioisotopes to beneficial use, the work of Melvin Calvin is
exemplary. The use of radioactive 14C by him in algal photosynthesis
studies led to the discovery that the first CO2 fixation product was a
3-carbon organic acid. He also contributed to working out the complete
biosynthetic pathway; hence it was called Calvin cycle after him. The
first product identified was 3-phosphoglyceric acid or in short PGA.
How many carbon atoms does it have?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 13 :
 PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS
143
Scientists also tried to know whether all plants have PGA as the first
product of CO2 fixation, or whether any other product was formed in
other plants. Experiments conducted over a wide range of plants led to
the discovery of another group of plants, where the first stable product of
CO2 fixation was again an organic acid, but one which had 4 carbon
atoms in it. This acid was identified to be oxaloacetic acid or OAA.  Since
then CO2 assimilation during photosynthesis  was said to be of two main
types: those plants in which the first product of CO2 fixation is a C3 acid
(PGA), i.e., the C3 pathway, and those in which the first product was a C4
acid (OAA), i.e., the C4 pathway.  These two groups of plants showed
other associated characteristics that we will discuss later.
11.7.1 The Primary Acceptor of CO2
Let us now ask ourselves a question that was asked by the scientists who
were struggling to understand the ‘dark reaction’. How many carbon atoms
would a molecule have which after accepting (fixing) CO2, would have 3
carbons (of PGA)?
The studies very unexpectedly showed that the acceptor molecule
was a 5-carbon ketose sugar – ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP).  Did any
of you think of this possibility?  Do not worry; the scientists also took
a long time and conducted many experiments to reach this conclusion.
They also believed that since the first product was a C3 acid, the primary
acceptor would be a 2-carbon compound; they spent many years trying
to identify a 2-carbon compound before they discovered the 5-carbon
RuBP.
11.7.2 The Calvin Cycle
Calvin and his co-workers then worked out the whole pathway and showed
that the pathway operated in a cyclic manner; the RuBP was regenerated.
Let us now see how the Calvin pathway operates and where the sugar is
synthesised.  Let us at the outset understand very clearly that the Calvin
pathway occurs in all photosynthetic plants; it does not matter whether
they have C3 or C4 (or any other) pathways (Figure 11.8).
For ease of understanding, the Calvin cycle can be described under
three stages: carboxylation, reduction and regeneration.
1. Carboxylation – Carboxylation is the fixation of CO2 into a stable organic
intermediate.  Carboxylation is the most crucial step of the Calvin cycle
where CO2 is utilised for the carboxylation of RuBP.  This reaction is
catalysed by the enzyme RuBP carboxylase which results in the formation
of two molecules of 3-PGA.  Since this enzyme also has an oxygenation
activity it would be more correct to call it RuBP carboxylase-oxygenase
or RuBisCO.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 14 :
 144
BIOLOGY
2. Reduction – These are a series of reactions that lead to the formation
of glucose.  The steps involve utilisation of 2 molecules of ATP for
phosphorylation and two of NADPH for reduction per CO2 molecule
fixed.  The fixation of six molecules of CO2 and 6 turns of the cycle are
required for the formation of one molecule of glucose from the pathway.
3. Regeneration – Regeneration of the CO2 acceptor molecule RuBP is
crucial if the cycle is to continue uninterrupted.  The regeneration
steps require one ATP for phosphorylation to form RuBP.
Ribulose-1,5-
bisphosphate
Atmosphere
C02 + H2O
Carboxylation
ADP
Regeneration
3-phosphoglycerate
Triose
phosphate
Reduction
ATP
+
NADPH
ADP
+
Pi +NADP+
Sucrose, starch
ATP
Figure 11.8 The Calvin cycle proceeds in three stages : (1) carboxylation, during which
CO2 combines with ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate; (2) reduction, during which
carbohydrate is formed at the expense of the photochemically made ATP
and NADPH; and (3) regeneration during which the CO2 acceptor ribulose-
1,5-bisphosphate is formed again so that the cycle continues
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 15 :
 PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS
145
Hence for every CO2  molecule entering the Calvin cycle, 3 molecules
of ATP and 2 of NADPH are required.  It is probably to meet this difference
in number of ATP and NADPH used in the dark reaction that the cyclic
phosphorylation takes place.
To make one molecule of glucose 6 turns of the cycle are required.
Work out how many ATP and NADPH molecules will be required to make
one molecule of glucose through the Calvin pathway.
It might help you to understand all of this if we look at what goes in
and what comes out of the Calvin cycle.
In
Out
Six CO2
One glucose
18 ATP
18 ADP
12 NADPH
12 NADP
11.8
THE C4 PATHWAY
Plants that are adapted to dry tropical regions have the C4 pathway
mentioned earlier. Though these plants have the C4 oxaloacetic acid as
the first CO2 fixation product they use the C3 pathway or the Calvin cycle
as the main biosynthetic pathway. Then, in what way are they different
from C3 plants? This is a question that you may reasonably ask.
C4 plants are special: They have a special type of leaf anatomy, they
tolerate higher temperatures, they show a response to high light intensities,
they lack a process called photorespiration and have greater productivity
of biomass. Let us understand these one by one.
Study vertical sections of leaves, one of a C3 plant and the other of a C4
plant. Do you notice the differences? Do both have the same types of
mesophylls?  Do they have similar cells around the vascular bundle sheath?
The particularly large cells around the vascular bundles of the C4
plants are called bundle sheath cells, and the leaves which have such
anatomy are said to have ‘Kranz’ anatomy. ‘Kranz’ means ‘wreath’ and
is a reflection of the arrangement of cells.  The bundle sheath cells may
form several layers around the vascular bundles; they are characterised
by having a large number of chloroplasts, thick walls impervious to
gaseous exchange and no intercellular spaces. You may like to cut a
section of the leaves of C4 plants – maize or sorghum – to observe the
Kranz anatomy and the distribution of mesophyll cells.
It would be interesting for you to collect leaves of diverse species of
plants around you and cut vertical sections of the leaves. Observe under
the microscope – look for the bundle sheath around the vascular
bundles.  The presence of the bundle sheath would help you identify
the C4 plants.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 16 :
 146
BIOLOGY
Now study the pathway shown in Figure 11.9. This pathway that has
been named the Hatch and Slack Pathway, is again a cyclic process.  Let
us study the pathway by listing the steps.
The primary CO2 acceptor is a 3-carbon molecule phosphoenol
pyruvate (PEP) and is present in the mesophyll cells. The enzyme
responsible for this fixation is PEP carboxylase or PEPcase. It is important
to register that the mesophyll cells lack RuBisCO enzyme. The C4 acid
OAA is formed in the mesophyll cells.
It then forms other 4-carbon compounds like malic acid or aspartic
acid in the mesophyll cells itself, which are transported to the bundle
sheath cells.  In the bundle sheath cells these C4 acids are broken down
to release CO2 and a 3-carbon molecule.
The 3-carbon molecule is transported back to the mesophyll where it
is converted to PEP again, thus, completing the cycle.
The CO2 released in the bundle sheath cells enters the C3 or the Calvin
pathway, a pathway common to all plants. The bundle sheath cells are
Figure 11.9 Diagrammatic representation of the Hatch and Slack Pathway
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 17 :
 PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS
147
rich in an enzyme Ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase
(RuBisCO), but lack PEPcase.  Thus, the basic pathway that results in
the formation of the sugars, the Calvin pathway, is common to the C3 and
C4 plants.
Did you note that the Calvin pathway occurs in all the mesophyll
cells of the C3 plants? In the C4 plants it does not take place in the
mesophyll cells but does so only in the bundle sheath cells.
11.9
PHOTORESPIRATION
Let us try and understand one more process that creates an important
difference between C3 and C4 plants – Photorespiration. To understand
photorespiration we have to know a little bit more about the first step of
the Calvin pathway – the first CO2 fixation step. This is the  reaction
where RuBP combines with CO2 to form 2 molecules of 3PGA, that is
catalysed by RuBisCO.
RuBP
CO
PGA
RuBisCo
+

→

×
2
2
3
RuBisCO that is the most abundant enzyme in the world (Do you
wonder why?) is characterised by the fact that its active site can bind to
both CO2 and O2 – hence the name. Can you think how this could be
possible? RuBisCO has a much greater affinity for CO2 when the CO2: O2
is nearly equal. Imagine what would happen if this were not so! This
binding is competitive. It is the relative concentration of O2 and CO2 that
determines which of the two will bind to the enzyme.
In C3 plants some O2 does bind to RuBisCO, and hence CO2 fixation is
decreased. Here the RuBP instead of being converted to  2 molecules of
PGA binds with O2 to form one molecule of phosphoglycerate and
phosphoglycolate (2 Carbon) in a pathway called photorespiration. In
the photorespiratory pathway, there is neither synthesis of sugars, nor of
ATP. Rather it results in the release of CO2 with the utilisation of ATP. In
the photorespiratory pathway there is no synthesis of ATP or NADPH.
The biological function of photorespiration is not known yet.
In C4 plants photorespiration does not occur. This is because they
have a mechanism that increases the concentration of CO2 at the enzyme
site.  This takes place when the C4 acid from the mesophyll is broken
down in the bundle sheath cells to release CO2 – this results in increasing
the intracellular concentration of CO2. In turn, this ensures that the
RuBisCO functions as a carboxylase minimising the oxygenase activity.
Now that you know that the C4 plants lack photorespiration, you
probably can understand why productivity and yields are better in these
plants. In addition these plants show tolerance to higher temperatures.
Based on the above discussion can you compare plants showing
the C3 and the C4 pathway?  Use the table format given in table 11.1 and
fill in the information.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 18 :
 148
BIOLOGY
TABLE 11.1 Fill in the Columns 2 and 3 in this table to highlight the differences
between C3 and C4 Plants
Characteristics
C3 Plants
C4 Plants
Choose from
Cell type in which the Calvin
Mesophyll/Bundle sheath/both
cycle takes place
Cell type in which the initial
Mesophyll/Bundle sheath /both
carboxylation reaction occurs
How many cell types does the
Two: Bundle sheath and
leaf have that fix CO2.
mesophyll
One: Mesophyll
Three: Bundle sheath, palisade,
spongy mesophyll
Which is the primary CO2 acceptor
RuBP/PEP/PGA
Number of carbons  in the
5 / 4 / 3
primary CO2 acceptor
Which is the primary CO2
PGA/OAA/RuBP/PEP
fixation product
No. of carbons in the primary
3 / 4 / 5
CO2 fixation product
Does the plant have RuBisCO?
Yes/No/Not always
Does the plant have PEP Case?
Yes/No/Not always
Which cells in the plant have
Mesophyll/Bundle sheath/none
Rubisco?
CO2 fixation rate under high
Low/ high/ medium
light conditions
Whether photorespiration is
High/negligible/sometimes
present at low light intensities
Whether photorespiration is
High/negligible/sometimes
present at high light intensities
Whether photorespiration would be
High/negligible/sometimes
present at low CO2 concentrations
Whether photorespiration would be
High/negligible/sometimes
present at high CO2 concentrations
Temperature optimum
30-40 C/20-25C/above 40 C
Examples
Cut vertical sections of leaves of
different plants and observe under
the microscope for Kranz anatomy
and list them in the appropriate
columns.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 19 :
 PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS
149
11.10
FACTORS AFFECTING PHOTOSYNTHESIS
An understanding of the factors that affect photosynthesis is necessary.
The rate of photosynthesis is very important in determining the yield of
plants including crop plants.  Photosynthesis is under the influence of
several factors, both internal (plant) and external. The plant factors include
the number, size, age and orientation of leaves, mesophyll cells and
chloroplasts, internal CO2 concentration and the amount of chlorophyll.
The plant or internal factors are dependent on the genetic predisposition
and the growth of the plant.
The external factors would include the availability of sunlight,
temperature, CO2 concentration and water.  As a plant photosynthesises,
all these factors will simultaneously affect its rate. Hence, though several
factors interact and simultaneously affect photosynthesis or CO2 fixation,
usually one factor is the major cause or is the one that limits the rate.
Hence, at any point the rate will be determined by the factor available at
sub-optimal levels.
When several factors affect any [bio] chemical process, Blackman’s
(1905) Law of Limiting Factors comes into effect. This states the following:
If a chemical process is affected by more than one factor, then its
rate will be determined by the factor which is nearest to its minimal
value: it is the factor which directly affects the process if its quantity is
changed.
For example, despite the presence of a green
leaf and optimal light and CO2 conditions, the
plant may not photosynthesise if the temperature
is very low. This leaf, if given the optimal
temperature, will start photosynthesising.
11.10.1
Light
We need to distinguish between light quality, light
intensity and the duration of exposure to light,
while discussing light as a factor that affects
photosynthesis. There is a linear relationship
between incident light and CO2 fixation rates at
low light intensities. At higher light intensities,
gradually the rate does not show further increase
as other factors become limiting (Figure 11.10).
What is interesting to note is that light saturation
occurs at 10 per cent of the full sunlight. Hence,
except for plants in shade or in dense forests, light
is rarely a limiting factor in nature. Increase in
Figure 11.10 Graph of light intensity on the
rate of photosynthesis
Rate of photosynthesis
Light intensity
A
B
C
D
E
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 20 :
 150
BIOLOGY
incident light beyond a point causes the breakdown of chlorophyll and a
decrease in photosynthesis.
11.10.2 Carbon dioxide Concentration
Carbon dioxide is the major limiting factor for photosynthesis.  The
concentration of CO2 is very low in the atmosphere (between 0.03 and
0.04 per cent). Increase in concentration upto 0.05 per cent can cause an
increase in CO2 fixation rates; beyond this the levels can become damaging
over longer periods.
The C3 and C4 plants respond differently to CO2 concentrations.  At
low light conditions neither group responds to high CO2 conditions.  At
high light intensities, both C3 and C4 plants show increase in the rates of
photosynthesis. What is important to note is that the C4 plants show
saturation at about 360 µlL-1 while C3 responds to increased CO2
concentration and saturation is seen only beyond 450 µlL-1.  Thus, current
availability of CO2 levels is limiting to the C3 plants.
The fact that C3 plants respond to higher CO2 concentration by
showing increased rates of photosynthesis leading to higher productivity
has been used for some greenhouse crops such as tomatoes and bell
pepper. They are allowed to grow in carbon dioxide enriched atmosphere
that leads to higher yields.
11.10.3  Temperature
The dark reactions being enzymatic are temperature controlled. Though
the light reactions are also temperature sensitive they are affected to a
much lesser extent. The C4 plants respond to higher temperatures and
show higher rate of photosynthesis while C3 plants have a much lower
temperature optimum.
The temperature optimum for photosynthesis of different plants also
depends on the habitat that they are adapted to.  Tropical plants have a
higher temperature optimum than the plants adapted to temperate
climates.
11.10.4  Water
Even though water is one of the reactants in the light reaction, the effect of
water as a factor is more through its effect on the plant, rather than directly
on photosynthesis. Water stress causes the stomata to close hence reducing
the CO2 availability. Besides, water stress also makes leaves wilt, thus,
reducing the surface area of the leaves and their metabolic activity as well.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 21 :
 PHOTOSYNTHESIS IN HIGHER PLANTS
151
SUMMARY
Green plants make their own food by photosynthesis. During this process carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere is taken in by leaves through stomata and used for
making carbohydrates, principally glucose and starch.  Photosynthesis takes place
only in the green parts of the plants, mainly the leaves. Within the leaves, the
mesophyll cells have a large number of chloroplasts that are responsible for CO2
fixation.  Within the chloroplasts, the membranes are sites for the light reaction,
while the chemosynthetic pathway occurs in the stroma.  Photosynthesis has two
stages: the light reaction and the carbon fixing reactions. In the light reaction the
light energy is absorbed by the pigments present in the antenna, and funnelled to
special chlorophyll a molecules called reaction centre chlorophylls. There are two
photosystems, PS I and PS II. PS I has a 700 nm absorbing chlorophyll a P700
molecule at its reaction centre, while PS II has a P680 reaction centre that absorbs
red light at 680 nm.  After absorbing light, electrons are excited and transferred
through PS II and PS I and finally to NAD forming NADH. During this process a
proton gradient is created across the membrane of the thylakoid. The breakdown
of the protons gradient due to movement through the F0 part of the ATPase enzyme
releases enough energy for synthesis of ATP.  Splitting of water molecules is
associated with PS II resulting in the release of O2, protons and transfer of electrons
to PS II.
In the carbon fixation cycle, CO2 is added by the enzyme, RuBisCO, to a 5-
carbon compound RuBP that is converted to 2 molecules of 3-carbon PGA. This
is then converted to sugar by the Calvin cycle, and the RuBP is regenerated. During
this process ATP and NADPH synthesised in the light reaction are utilised. RuBisCO
also catalyses a wasteful oxygenation reaction in C3 plants: photorespiration.
Some tropical plants show a special type of photosynthesis called C4 pathway.
In these plants the first product of CO2 fixation that takes place in the mesophyll,
is a 4-carbon compound.  In the bundle sheath cells the Calvin pathway is carried
out for the synthesis of carbohydrates.
EXERCISES
1.
By looking at a plant externally can you tell whether a plant is C3 or C4? Why and
how?
2.
By looking at which internal structure of a plant can you tell whether a plant is
C3 or C4? Explain.
3.
Even though a very few cells in a C4 plant carry out the biosynthetic – Calvin
pathway, yet they are highly productive. Can you discuss why?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 11 - Page 22 :
 152
BIOLOGY
4.
RuBisCO is an enzyme that acts both as a carboxylase and oxygenase. Why do
you think RuBisCO carries out more carboxylation in C4 plants?
5.
Suppose there were plants that had a high concentration of Chlorophyll b, but
lacked chlorophyll a, would it carry out photosynthesis? Then why do plants
have chlorophyll b and other accessory pigments?
6.
Why is the colour of a leaf kept in the dark frequently yellow, or pale green?
Which pigment do you think is more stable?
7.
Look at leaves of the same plant on the shady side and compare it with the
leaves on the sunny side. Or, compare the potted plants kept in the sunlight with
those in the shade. Which of them has leaves that are darker green ? Why?
8.
Figure 11.10 shows the effect of light on the rate of photosynthesis.  Based on the
graph, answer the following questions:
(a) At which point/s (A, B or C) in the curve is light a limiting factor?
(b) What could be the limiting factor/s in region A?
(c) What do C and  D represent on the curve?
9.
Give comparison between the following:
(a) C3 and C4 pathways
(b) Cyclic and non-cyclic photophosphorylation
(c) Anatomy of leaf in C3 and C4 plants
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 1 :
 166
BIOLOGY
You have already studied the organisation of a flowering plant in Chapter
5. Have you ever thought about where and how the structures like roots,
stems, leaves, flowers, fruits and seeds arise and that too in an orderly
sequence? You are, by now, aware of the terms seed, seedling, plantlet,
mature plant. You have also seen that trees continue to increase in height
or girth over a period of time. However, the leaves, flowers and fruits of the
same tree not only have limited dimensions but also appear and fall
periodically and some time repeatedly. Why does vegetative phase precede
flowering in a plant? All plant organs are made up of a variety of tissues; is
there any relationship between the structure of a cell, a tissue, an organ
and the function they perform? Can the structure and the function of these
be altered? All cells of a plant are descendents of the zygote. The question
is, then, why and how do they have different structural and functional
attributes? Development is the sum of two processes: growth and
differentiation. To begin with, it is essential and sufficient to know that the
development of a mature plant from a zygote (fertilised egg) follow a precise
and highly ordered succession of events. During this process a complex
body organisation is formed that produces roots, leaves, branches, flowers,
fruits, and seeds, and eventually they die (Figure 13.1). The first step in the
process of plant growth is seed germination. The seed germinates when
favourable conditions for growth exist in the environment. In absence of
such favourable conditions the seeds do not germinate and goes into a
period of suspended growth or rest. Once favourable conditions return,
the seeds resume metabolic activities and growth takes place.
In this chapter, you shall also study some of the factors which
govern and control these developmental processes. These factors are both
intrinsic (internal) and extrinsic (external) to the plant.
PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER  13
13.1 Growth
13.2 Differentiation,
Dedifferentiation
and
Redifferentiation
13.3 Development
13.4 Plant Growth
Regulators
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 2 :
 PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
167
13.1
GROWTH
Growth is regarded as one of the most fundamental and conspicuous
characteristics of a living being. What is growth? Growth can be defined
as an irreversible permanent increase in size of an organ or its parts or
even of an individual cell. Generally, growth is accompanied by metabolic
processes (both anabolic and catabolic), that occur at the expense of
energy. Therefore, for example, expansion of a leaf is growth. How would
you describe the swelling of piece of wood when placed in water?
13.1.1  Plant Growth Generally is Indeterminate
Plant growth is unique because plants retain the capacity for unlimited
growth throughout their life. This ability of the plants is due to the presence
of meristems at certain locations in their body. The cells of such meristems
have the capacity to divide and self-perpetuate. The product, however,
soon loses the capacity to divide and such cells make up the plant body.
This form of growth wherein new cells are always being added to the
plant body by the activity of the meristem is called the open form of growth.
What would happen if the meristem ceases to divide? Does this ever
happen?
In earlier classes, you have studied about the root apical meristem
and the shoot apical meristem. You know that they are responsible for
Seed coat
Epicotyl
hook
Cotyledons
Cotyledon
Soil line
Epicotyl
Hypocotyl
Hypocotyl
Figure 13.1 Germination and seedling development in bean
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 3 :
 168
BIOLOGY
the primary growth of the plants and principally
contribute to the elongation of the plants along
their axis. You also know that in dicotyledonous
plants and gymnosperms, the lateral meristems,
vascular cambium and cork-cambium appear
later in life. These are the meristems that cause
the increase in the girth of the organs in which
they are active. This is known as secondary
growth of the plant (see Figure 13.2).
13.1.2 Growth is Measurable
Growth, at a cellular level, is principally a
consequence of increase in the amount of
protoplasm. Since increase in protoplasm is
difficult to measure directly, one generally
measures some quantity which is more or less
proportional to it. Growth is, therefore,
measured by a variety of parameters some of
which are: increase in fresh weight, dry weight,
length, area, volume and cell number. You may
find it amazing to know that one single maize
root apical mersitem can give rise to more than
17,500 new cells per hour, whereas cells in a
watermelon may increase in size by upto
3,50,000 times. In the former, growth is
expressed as increase in cell number; the latter
expresses growth as increase in size of the cell.
While the growth of a pollen tube is measured
in terms of its length, an increase in surface area
denotes the growth in a dorsiventral leaf.
13.1.3 Phases of Growth
The period of growth is generally divided into
three phases, namely, meristematic, elongation
and maturation (Figure 13.3). Let us
understand this by looking at the root tips. The
constantly dividing cells, both at the root apex
and the shoot apex, represent the meristematic
phase of growth. The cells in this region are rich
in protoplasm, possess large conspicuous
nuclei. Their cell walls are primary in nature,
thin 
and 
cellulosic 
with 
abundant
plasmodesmatal connections. The cells
proximal (just next, away from the tip) to the
Shoot apical
meristem
Vascular
cambium
Vascular
cambium
Root apical
meristem
Shoot
Root
Figure 13.2 Diagrammatic representation of
locations of root apical meristem,
shoot aplical meristem and
vascular cambium. Arrows exhibit
the direction of growth of cells and
organ
G
F
E
D
C
B
A
Figure 13.3 Detection of zones of elongation by
the parallel line technique. Zones
A, B, C, D immediately behind the
apex have elongated most.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 4 :
 PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
169
meristematic zone represent the phase of elongation. Increased
vacuolation, cell enlargement and new cell wall deposition are the
characteristics of the cells in this phase. Further away from the apex, i.e.,
more proximal to the phase of elongation, lies the portion of axis which is
undergoing the phase of maturation. The cells of this zone, attain their
maximal size in terms of wall thickening and protoplasmic modifications.
Most of the tissues and cell types you have studied in earlier classes
represent this phase.
13.1.4  Growth Rates
The increased growth per unit time is termed as growth rate. Thus, rate
of growth can be expressed mathematically. An organism, or a part of the
organism can produce more cells in a variety of ways.
Figure13.4 Diagrammatic representation of : (a) Arithmetic (b) Geometric growth and
(c) Stages during embryo development showing geometric and arithematic
phases
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 5 :
 170
BIOLOGY
The growth rate shows an increase that may be
arithmetic or geometrical (Figure 13.4).
In arithmetic growth, following mitotic cell
division, only one daughter cell continues to divide
while the other differentiates and matures. The
simplest expression of arithmetic growth is
exemplified by a root elongating at a constant rate.
Look at Figure 13.5. On plotting the length of the
organ against time, a linear curve is obtained.
Mathematically, it is expressed as
Lt = L0 + rt
Lt = length at time ‘t’
L0 = length at time ‘zero’
r    = growth rate / elongation per unit time.
Let us now see what happens in geometrical
growth. In most systems, the initial growth is slow
(lag phase), and it increases rapidly thereafter – at
an exponential rate (log or exponential phase). Here,
both the progeny cells following mitotic cell division
retain the ability to divide and continue to do so.
However, with limited nutrient supply, the growth
slows down leading to a stationary phase. If we plot
the parameter of growth against time, we get a typical
sigmoid or S-curve (Figure 13.6). A sigmoid curve
is a characteristic of living organism growing in a
natural environment. It is typical for all cells, tissues
and organs of a plant. Can you think of more similar
examples? What kind of a curve can you expect in
a tree showing seasonal activities?
The exponential growth can be expressed as
W1 = W0 ert
W1 = final size (weight, height, number etc.)
W0 = initial size at the beginning of the period
r     = growth rate
t     = time of growth
e    = base of natural logarithms
Here, r is the relative growth rate and is also the
measure of the ability of the plant to produce new
plant material, referred to as efficiency index. Hence,
the final size of W1 depends on the initial size, W0.
Figure 13.5 Constant linear growth, a plot
of length L against time t
Figure 13.6 An idealised sigmoid growth
curve typical of cells in culture,
and many higher plants and
plant organs
Size/weight of the organ
Exponential phase
Lag phase
Time
Stationary phase
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 6 :
 PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
171
Quantitative comparisons between the growth of living system can
also be made in two ways : (i) measurement and the comparison of total
growth per unit time is called the absolute growth rate. (ii) The growth of
the given system per unit time expressed on a common basis, e.g., per
unit initial parameter is called the relative growth rate. In Figure 13.7
two leaves, A and B, are drawn that are of different sizes but shows
absolute increase in area in the given time to give leaves, A1 and B1. However,
one of them shows much higher relative growth rate. Which one and why?
13.1.5 Conditions for Growth
Why do you not try to write down what you think are necessary conditions
for growth? This list may have water, oxygen and nutrients as very essential
elements for growth. The plant cells grow in size by cell enlargement which
in turn requires water. Turgidity of cells helps in extension growth. Thus,
plant growth and further development is intimately linked to the water
status of the plant. Water also provides the medium for enzymatic activities
needed for growth. Oxygen helps in releasing metabolic energy essential
for growth activities. Nutrients (macro and micro essential elements) are
required by plants for the synthesis of protoplasm and act as source of
energy.
In addition, every plant organism has an optimum temperature range
best suited for its growth. Any deviation from this range could be
detrimental to its survival. Environmental signals such as light and gravity
also affect certain phases/stages of growth.
Figure13.7
Diagrammatic comparison of absolute and relative growth rates. Both
leaves A and B have increased their area by 5 cm2 in a given time to
produce A1, B1 leaves.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 7 :
 172
BIOLOGY
13.2
DIFFERENTIATION, DEDIFFERENTIATION AND
REDIFFERENTIATION
The cells derived from root apical and shoot-apical meristems and
cambium differentiate and mature to perform specific functions. This act
leading to maturation is termed as differentiation. During differentiation,
cells undergo few to major structural changes both in their cell walls and
protoplasm. For example, to form a tracheary element, the cells would
lose their protoplasm. They also develop a very strong, elastic,
lignocellulosic secondary cell walls, to carry water to long distances even
under extreme tension. Try to correlate the various anatomical features
you encounter in plants to the functions they perform.
Plants show another interesting phenomenon. The living differentiated
cells, that by now have lost the capacity to divide can regain the capacity
of division under certain conditions. This phenomenon is termed as
dedifferentiation. For example, formation of meristems – interfascicular
cambium and cork cambium from fully differentiated parenchyma cells.
While doing so, such meristems/tissues are able to divide and produce
cells that once again lose the capacity to divide but mature to perform
specific functions, i.e., get redifferentiated. List some of the tissues in a
woody dicotyledenous plant that are the products of redifferentiation.
How would you describe a tumour? What would you call the parenchyma
cells that are made to divide under controlled laboratory conditions during
plant tissue culture?
Recall, in Section 13.1.1, we have mentioned that the growth in plants
is open, i.e., it can be indeterminate or determinate. Now, we may say that
even differentiation in plants is open, because cells/tissues arising out of
the same meristem have different structures at maturity. The final
structure at maturity of a cell/tissue is also determined by the location of
the cell within. For example, cells positioned away from root apical
meristems differentiate as root-cap cells, while those pushed to the
periphery mature as epidermis. Can you add a few more examples of
open differentiation correlating the position of a cell to  its position in an
organ?
13.3
 DEVELOPMENT
Development is a term that includes all changes that an organism goes
through during its life cycle from germination of the seed to senescence.
Diagrammatic representation of the sequence of processes which
constitute the development of a cell of a higher plant is given in Figure
13.8. It is also applicable to tissues/organs.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 8 :
 PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
173
Plants follow different pathways in response to environment or phases
of life to form different kinds of structures. This ability is called plasticity,
e.g., heterophylly in cotton, coriander and larkspur. In such plants, the
leaves of the juvenile plant are different in shape from those in mature
plants. On the other hand, difference in shapes of leaves produced in air
and those produced in water in buttercup also represent the
heterophyllous development due to environment (Figure 13.9). This
phenomenon of heterophylly is an example of plasticity.
Figure 13.8  Sequence of the developmental process in a plant cell
Cell Division
Death
Plasmatic growth
Differentiation
Expansion
(Elongation)
Maturation
MERISTEMATIC
CELL
SENESCENCE
MATURE
CELL
Figure 13.9  Heterophylly in (a) larkspur and (b) buttercup
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 9 :
 174
BIOLOGY
Thus, growth, differentiation and development are very closely related
events in the life of a plant. Broadly, development is considered as the
sum of growth and differentiation. Development in plants (i.e., both growth
and differentiation) is under the control of intrinsic and extrinsic factors.
The former includes both intracellular (genetic) or intercellular factors
(chemicals such as plant growth regulators) while the latter includes light,
temperature, water, oxygen, nutrition, etc.
13.4
PLANT GROWTH REGULATORS
13.4.1 Characteristics
The plant growth regulators (PGRs) are small, simple molecules of diverse
chemical composition. They could be indole compounds (indole-3-acetic
acid, IAA); adenine derivatives (N6-furfurylamino purine, kinetin),
derivatives of carotenoids (abscisic acid, ABA); terpenes (gibberellic acid,
GA3) or gases (ethylene, C2H4). Plant growth regulators are variously
described as plant growth substances, plant hormones or phytohormones
in literature.
The PGRs can be broadly divided into two groups based on their
functions in a living plant body. One group of PGRs are involved in growth
promoting activities, such as cell division, cell enlargement, pattern
formation, tropic growth, flowering, fruiting and seed formation. These
are also called plant growth promoters, e.g., auxins, gibberellins and
cytokinins. The PGRs of the other group play an important role in plant
responses to wounds and stresses of biotic and abiotic origin. They are
also involved in various growth inhibiting activities such as dormancy
and abscission. The PGR abscisic acid belongs to this group. The gaseous
PGR, ethylene, could fit either of the groups, but it is largely an inhibitor
of growth activities.
13.4.2  The Discovery of Plant Growth Regulators
Interestingly, the discovery of each of the five
major groups of PGRs have been accidental.
All this started with the observation of Charles
Darwin and his son Francis Darwin when they
observed that the coleoptiles of canary grass
responded to unilateral illumination by
growing 
towards 
the 
light 
source
(phototropism). After a series of experiments,
it was concluded that the tip of coleoptile was
the site of transmittable influence that caused
the bending of the entire coleoptile (Figure
13.10). Auxin was isolated by F.W. Went from
tips of coleoptiles of oat seedlings.
Figure 13.10 Experiment used to demonstrate
that tip of the coleoptile is the
source of auxin. Arrows indicate
direction of light
a
b
c
d
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 10 :
 PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
175
The ‘bakanae’ (foolish seedling) disease of rice seedlings, was caused
by a fungal pathogen Gibberella fujikuroi. E. Kurosawa (1926) reported
the appearance of symptoms of the disease in rice seedlings when they
were treated with sterile filtrates of the fungus. The active substances
were later identified as gibberellic acid.
F. Skoog and his co-workers observed that from the internodal
segments of tobacco stems the callus (a mass of undifferentiated cells)
proliferated only if, in addition to auxins the nutrients medium was
supplemented with one of the following: extracts of vascular tissues, yeast
extract, coconut milk or DNA. Miller et al. (1955), later identified and
crystallised the cytokinesis promoting active substance that they
termed kinetin.
During mid-1960s, three independent researches reported the
purification and chemical characterisation of three different kinds of
inhibitors: inhibitor-B, abscission II and dormin. Later all the three were
proved to be chemically identical. It was named abscisic acid (ABA).
H.H. Cousins (1910) confirmed the release of a volatile substance from
ripened oranges that hastened the ripening of stored unripened bananas.
Later this volatile substance was identified as ethylene, a gaseous PGR.
Let us study some of the physiological effects of these five categories
of PGRs in the next section.
13.4.3  Physiological Effects of Plant Growth Regulators
13.4.3.1
13.4.3.1
13.4.3.1
13.4.3.1
13.4.3.1 Auxins
Auxins
Auxins
Auxins
Auxins
Auxins (from Greek ‘auxein’ : to grow) was first isolated from human urine.
The term ‘auxin’ is applied to the indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), and to other
natural and synthetic compounds having certain growth regulating
properties. They are generally produced by the growing apices of the stems
and roots, from where they migrate to the regions of their action. Auxins
like IAA and indole butyric acid (IBA) have been isolated from plants.
NAA (naphthalene acetic acid) and 2, 4-D (2, 4-dichlorophenoxyacetic)
are synthetic auxins. All these auxins have been used extensively in
agricultural and horticultural practices.
They help to initiate rooting in stem cuttings, an application widely
used for plant propagation. Auxins promote flowering e.g. in pineapples.
They help to prevent fruit and leaf drop at early stages but promote the
abscission  of older mature leaves and fruits.
In most higher plants, the growing apical bud inhibits the growth of
the lateral (axillary) buds, a phenomenon called apical dominance.
Removal of shoot tips (decapitation) usually results in the growth of lateral
buds (Figure 13.11). It is widely applied in tea plantations, hedge-making.
Can you explain why?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 11 :
 176
BIOLOGY
Auxins also induce parthenocarpy, e.g., in
tomatoes. They are widely used as herbicides.
2, 4-D, widely used to kill dicotyledonous
weeds, 
does 
not 
affect 
mature
monocotyledonous plants. It is used to prepare
weed-free lawns by gardeners. Auxin also
controls xylem differentiation and helps in cell
division.
13.4.3.2
13.4.3.2
13.4.3.2
13.4.3.2
13.4.3.2 Gibberellins
Gibberellins
Gibberellins
Gibberellins
Gibberellins
Gibberellins are another kind of promotory
PGR. There are more than 100 gibberellins
reported from widely different organisms such
as fungi and higher plants. They are denoted
as GA1, GA2, GA3 and so on. However,
Gibberellic acid (GA3) was one of the first
gibberellins to be discovered and remains the
most intensively studied form. All GAs are
acidic. They produce a wide range of physiological responses in the plants.
Their ability to cause an increase in length of axis is used to increase the
length of grapes stalks. Gibberellins, cause fruits like apple to elongate
and improve its shape. They also delay senescence. Thus, the fruits can
be left on the tree longer so as to extend the market period. GA3 is used to
speed up the malting process in brewing industry.
Sugarcane stores carbohydrate as sugar in their stems. Spraying
sugarcane crop with gibberellins increases the length of the stem, thus
increasing the yield by as much as 20 tonnes per acre.
Spraying juvenile conifers with GAs hastens the maturity period, thus
leading to early seed production. Gibberellins also promotes bolting
(internode elongation just prior to flowering) in beet, cabbages and many
plants with rosette habit.
13.4.3.3
13.4.3.3
13.4.3.3
13.4.3.3
13.4.3.3 Cytokinins
Cytokinins
Cytokinins
Cytokinins
Cytokinins
Cytokinins have specific effects on cytokinesis, and were discovered as
kinetin (a modified form of adenine, a purine) from the autoclaved herring
sperm DNA. Kinetin does not occur naturally in plants. Search for natural
substances with cytokinin-like activities led to the isolation of zeatin from
corn-kernels and coconut milk. Since the discovery of zeatin, several
naturally occurring cytokinins, and some synthetic compounds with cell
division promoting activity, have been identified. Natural cytokinins are
Figure 13.11 Apical dominance in plants :
(a) A plant with apical bud intact
(b) A plant with apical bud removed
Note the growth of lateral buds into
branches after decapitation.
(a)
(b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 12 :
 PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
177
synthesised in regions where rapid cell division occurs, for example, root
apices, developing shoot buds, young fruits etc. It helps to produce new
leaves, chloroplasts in leaves, lateral shoot growth and adventitious shoot
formation. Cytokinins help overcome the apical dominance. They promote
nutrient mobilisation which helps in the delay of leaf senescence.
13.4.3.4
13.4.3.4
13.4.3.4
13.4.3.4
13.4.3.4 Ethylene
Ethylene
Ethylene
Ethylene
Ethylene
Ethylene is a simple gaseous PGR. It is synthesised in large amounts
by tissues undergoing senescence and ripening fruits. Influences of
ethylene on plants include horizontal growth of seedlings, swelling of
the axis and apical hook formation in dicot seedlings. Ethylene promotes
senescence and abscission of plant organs especially of leaves and
flowers. Ethylene is highly effective in fruit ripening. It enhances the
respiration rate during ripening of the fruits. This rise in rate of
respiration is called respiratory climactic.
Ethylene breaks seed and bud dormancy, initiates germination in
peanut seeds, sprouting of potato tubers. Ethylene promotes rapid
internode/petiole elongation in deep water rice plants. It helps leaves/
upper parts of the shoot to remain above water. Ethylene also promotes
root growth and root hair formation, thus helping the plants to increase
their absorption surface.
Ethylene is used to initiate flowering and for synchronising fruit-set
in pineapples. It also induces flowering in mango. Since ethylene regulates
so many physiological processes, it is one of the most widely used PGR in
agriculture. The most widely used compound as source of ethylene is
ethephon. Ethephon in an aqueous solution is readily absorbed and
transported within the plant and releases ethylene slowly. Ethephon
hastens fruit ripening in tomatoes and apples and accelerates abscission
in flowers and fruits (thinning of cotton, cherry, walnut). It promotes female
flowers in cucumbers thereby increasing the yield.
13.4.3.5
13.4.3.5
13.4.3.5
13.4.3.5
13.4.3.5 Abscisic acid
Abscisic acid
Abscisic acid
Abscisic acid
Abscisic acid
As mentioned earlier, abscisic acid (ABA) was discovered for its role in
regulating abscission and dormancy. But like other PGRs, it also has
other wide ranging effects on plant growth and development. It acts as a
general plant growth inhibitor and an inhibitor of plant metabolism.
ABA inhibits seed germination. ABA stimulates the closure of stomata
and increases the tolerance of plants to various kinds of stresses.
Therefore, it is also called the stress hormone. ABA plays an important
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 13 :
 178
BIOLOGY
role in seed development, maturation and dormancy. By inducing
dormancy, ABA helps seeds to withstand desiccation and other factors
unfavourable for growth. In most situations, ABA acts as an antagonist
to GAs.
We may summarise that for any and every phase of growth,
differentiation and development of plants, one or the other PGR has some
role to play. Such roles could be complimentary or antagonistic. These
could be individualistic or synergistic.
Similarly, there are a number of events in the life of a plant where
more than one PGR interact to affect that event, e.g., dormancy in seeds/
buds, abscission, senescence, apical dominance, etc.
Remember, the role of PGR is of only one kind of intrinsic control.
Along with genomic control and extrinsic factors, they play an important
role in plant growth and development. Many of the extrinsic factors such
as temperature and light, control plant growth and development via PGR.
Some of such events could be: vernalisation, flowering, dormancy, seed
germination, plant movements, etc.
We shall discuss briefly the role of light and temperature (both of them,
the extrinsic factors) on initiation of flowering.
SUMMARY
Growth is one of the most conspicuous events in any living organism. It is
an irreversible increase expressed in parameters such as size, area, length,
height, volume, cell number etc. It conspicuously involves increased
protoplasmic material. In plants, meristems are the sites of growth. Root
and shoot apical meristems sometimes alongwith intercalary meristem,
contribute to the elongation growth of plant axes. Growth is indeterminate
in higher plants. Following cell division in root and shoot apical meristem
cells, the growth could be arithmetic or geometrical. Growth may not be
and generally is not sustained at a high rate throughout the life of cell/
tissue/organ/organism. One can define three principle phases of growth
– the lag, the log and the senescent phase. When a cell loses the capacity
to divide, it leads to differentiation. Differentiation results in development
of structures that is commensurate with the function the cells finally has
to perform. General principles for differentiation for cell, tissues and organs
are similar. A differentiated cell may dedifferentiate and then redifferentiate.
Since differentiation in plants is open, the development could also be
flexible, i.e., the development is the sum of growth and differentiation.
Plant exhibit plasticity in development.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 14 :
 PLANT GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT
179
Plant growth and development are under the control of both intrinsic
and extrinsic factors. Intercellular intrinsic factors are the chemical
substances, called plant growth regulators (PGR). There are diverse groups
of PGRs in plants, principally belonging to five groups: auxins, gibberellins,
cytokinins, abscisic acid and ethylene. These PGRs are synthesised in
various parts of the plant; they control different differentiation and
developmental events. Any PGR has diverse physiological effects on plants.
Diverse PGRs also manifest similar effects. PGRs may act synergistically
or antagonistically. Plant growth and development is also affected by light,
temperature, nutrition, oxygen status, gravity and such external factors.
EXERCISES
1.
Define growth, differentiation, development, dedifferentiation,
redifferentiation, determinate growth, meristem and growth rate.
2.
Why is not any one parameter good enough to demonstrate growth
throughout the life of a flowering plant?
3.
Describe briefly:
(a) Arithmetic growth
(b) Geometric growth
(c) Sigmoid growth curve
(d) Absolute and relative growth rates
4.
List five main groups of natural plant growth regulators. Write a note
on discovery, physiological functions and agricultural/horticultural
applications of any one of them.
5.
Why is abscisic acid also known as stress hormone?
6.
‘Both growth and differentiation in higher plants are open’. Comment.
7.
‘Both a short day plant and a long day plant can produce can flower
simultaneously in a given place’. Explain.
8.
Which one of the plant growth regulators would you use if you are
asked to:
(a) induce rooting in a twig
(b) quickly ripen a fruit
(c) delay leaf senescence
(d) induce growth in axillary buds
(e) ‘bolt’ a rosette plant
(f) induce immediate stomatal closure in leaves.
9.
Would a defoliated plant respond to photoperiodic cycle? Why?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 13 - Page 15 :
 180
BIOLOGY
10.
What would be expected to happen if:
(a) GA3 is applied to rice seedlings
(b) dividing cells stop differentiating
(c) a rotten fruit gets mixed with unripe fruits
(d) you forget to add cytokinin to the culture medium.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 15 - Page 1 :
 BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION
193
You have learnt that all living cells have to be provided with nutrients, O2
and other essential substances. Also, the waste or harmful substances
produced, have to be removed continuously for healthy functioning of
tissues. It is therefore, essential to have efficient mechanisms for the
movement of these substances to the cells and from the cells. Different
groups of animals have evolved different methods for this transport. Simple
organisms like sponges and coelenterates circulate water from their
surroundings through their body cavities to facilitate the cells to exchange
these substances. More complex organisms use special fluids within their
bodies to transport such materials. Blood is the most commonly used body
fluid by most of the higher organisms including humans for this purpose.
Another body fluid, lymph, also helps in the transport of certain substances.
In this chapter, you will learn about the composition and properties of
blood and lymph (tissue fluid) and the mechanism of circulation of blood
is also explained herein.
15.1
BLOOD
Blood is a special connective tissue consisting of a fluid matrix, plasma,
and formed elements.
15.1.1 Plasma
Plasma is a straw coloured, viscous fluid constituting nearly 55 per cent of
the blood. 90-92 per cent of plasma is water and proteins contribute 6-8
per cent of it. Fibrinogen, globulins and albumins are the major proteins.
BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION
CHAPTER  15
15.1 Blood
15.2 Lymph (Tissue
Fluid)
15.3 Circulatory
Pathways
15.4 Double
Circulation
15.5 Regulation of
Cardiac
Activity
15.6 Disorders of
Circulatory
System
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 15 - Page 2 :
 194
BIOLOGY
Fibrinogens are needed for clotting or coagulation of blood. Globulins
primarly are involved in defense mechanisms of the body and the albumins
help in osmotic balance. Plasma also contains small amounts of minerals
like Na+, Ca++, Mg++, HCO3
–, Cl–, etc. Glucose, amino acids, lipids, etc., are
also present in the plasma as they are always in transit in the body. Factors
for coagulation or clotting of blood are also present in the plasma in an
inactive form. Plasma without the clotting factors is called serum.
15.1.2 Formed Elements
Erythrocytes, leucocytes and platelets are collectively called formed
elements (Figure 15.1) and they constitute nearly 45 per cent of the blood.
Erythrocytes or red blood cells (RBC) are the most abundant of all
the cells in blood. A healthy adult man has, on an average, 5 millions to
5.5 millions of RBCs mm–3 of blood. RBCs are formed in the red bone
marrow in the adults. RBCs are devoid of nucleus in most of the mammals
and are biconcave in shape. They have a red coloured, iron containing
complex protein called haemoglobin, hence the colour and name of these
cells. A healthy individual has 12-16 gms of haemoglobin in every
100 ml of blood. These molecules play a significant role in transport of
respiratory gases. RBCs have an average life span of 120 days after which
they are destroyed in the spleen (graveyard of RBCs).
Leucocytes are also known as white blood cells (WBC) as they are
colourless due to the lack of haemoglobin. They are nucleated and are
relatively lesser in number which averages 6000-8000 mm–3 of blood.
Leucocytes are generally short lived. We have two main categories of WBCs
– granulocytes and agranulocytes. Neutrophils, eosinophils and basophils
are different types of granulocytes, while lymphocytes and monocytes
are the agranulocytes. Neutrophils are the most abundant cells (60-65
per cent) of the total WBCs and basophils are the least (0.5-1 per cent)
among them. Neutrophils and monocytes (6-8 per cent) are phagocytic
cells which destroy foreign organisms entering the body. Basophils secrete
histamine, serotonin, heparin, etc., and are involved in inflammatory
reactions. Eosinophils (2-3 per cent) resist infections and are also
R B C
Platelets
Eosinophil
Basophil
Neutrophil
Monocyte
T lymphocyte
B lymphocyte
Figure 15.1 Diagrammatic representation of formed elements in blood
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 15 - Page 3 :
 BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION
195
associated with allergic reactions. Lymphocytes (20-25 per cent) are of
two major types – ‘B’ and ‘T’ forms. Both B and T lymphocytes are
responsible for immune responses of the body.
Platelets also called thrombocytes, are cell fragments produced from
megakaryocytes (special cells in the bone marrow). Blood normally
contains 1,500,00-3,500,00 platelets mm–3. Platelets can release a variety
of substances most of which are involved in the coagulation or clotting of
blood. A reduction in their number can lead to clotting disorders which
will lead to excessive loss of blood from the body.
15.1.3 Blood Groups
As you know, blood of human beings differ in certain aspects though it
appears to be similar. Various types of grouping of blood has been done.
Two such groupings – the ABO and Rh – are widely used all over the
world.
15.1.3.1 ABO grouping
15.1.3.1 ABO grouping
15.1.3.1 ABO grouping
15.1.3.1 ABO grouping
15.1.3.1 ABO grouping
ABO grouping is based on the presence or absence of two surface antigens
(chemicals that can induce immune response) on the RBCs namely A
and B. Similarly, the plasma of different individuals contain two natural
antibodies (proteins produced in response to antigens). The distribution
of antigens and antibodies in the four groups of blood, A, B, AB and O
are given in Table 15.1. You probably know that during blood transfusion,
any blood cannot be used; the blood of a donor has to be carefully matched
with the blood of a recipient before any blood transfusion to avoid severe
problems of clumping (destruction of RBC). The donor’s compatibility is
also shown in the Table 15.1.
Blood Group
Antigens on
Antibodies Donor’s Group
RBCs
in Plasma
A
A
anti-B
A, O
B
B
anti-A
B, O
AB
A, B
nil
AB, A, B, O
O
nil
anti-A, B
O
TABLE 15.1  Blood Groups and Donor Compatibility
From the above mentioned table it is evident that group ‘O’ blood can
be donated to persons with any other blood group and hence ‘O’ group
individuals are called ‘universal donors’. Persons with ‘AB’ group can
accept blood from persons with AB as well as the other groups of blood.
Therefore, such persons are called ‘universal recipients’.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 15 - Page 4 :
 196
BIOLOGY
15.1.3.2
15.1.3.2
15.1.3.2
15.1.3.2
15.1.3.2
Rh grouping
Rh grouping
Rh grouping
Rh grouping
Rh grouping
Another antigen, the Rh antigen similar to one present in Rhesus monkeys
(hence Rh), is also observed on the surface of RBCs of majority (nearly 80
per cent) of humans. Such individuals are called Rh positive (Rh+ve)
and those in whom this antigen is absent are called Rh negative (Rh-ve).
An Rh-ve person, if exposed to Rh+ve blood, will form specific antibodies
against the Rh antigens. Therefore, Rh group should also be matched
before transfusions. A special case of Rh incompatibility (mismatching)
has been observed between the Rh-ve blood of a pregnant mother with
Rh+ve blood of the foetus. Rh antigens of the foetus do not get exposed to
the Rh-ve blood of the mother in the first pregnancy as the two bloods are
well separated by the placenta. However, during the delivery of the first
child, there is a possibility of exposure of the maternal blood to small
amounts of the Rh+ve blood from the foetus. In such cases, the mother
starts preparing antibodies against Rh antigen in her blood. In case of
her subsequent pregnancies, the Rh antibodies from the mother (Rh-ve)
can leak into the blood of the foetus (Rh+ve) and destroy the foetal RBCs.
This could be fatal to the foetus or could cause severe anaemia and
jaundice to the baby. This condition is called erythroblastosis foetalis.
This can be avoided by administering anti-Rh antibodies to the mother
immediately after the delivery of the first child.
15.1.4 Coagulation of Blood
You know that when you cut your finger or hurt yourself, your wound
does not continue to bleed for a long time; usually the blood stops flowing
after sometime. Do you know why? Blood exhibits coagulation or clotting
in response to an injury or trauma. This is a mechanism to prevent
excessive loss of blood from the body. You would have observed a dark
reddish brown scum formed at the site of a cut or an injury over a period
of time. It is a clot or coagulam formed mainly of a network of threads
called fibrins in which dead and damaged formed elements of blood are
trapped. Fibrins are formed by the conversion of inactive fibrinogens in
the plasma by the enzyme thrombin. Thrombins, in turn are formed from
another inactive substance present in the plasma called prothrombin. An
enzyme complex, thrombokinase, is required for the above reaction. This
complex is formed by a series of linked enzymic reactions (cascade
process) involving a number of factors present in the plasma in an inactive
state. An injury or a trauma stimulates the platelets in the blood to release
certain factors which activate the mechanism of coagulation. Certain
factors released by the tissues at the site of injury also can initiate
coagulation. Calcium ions play a very important role in clotting.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 15 - Page 5 :
 BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION
197
15.2
LYMPH (TISSUE FLUID)
As the blood passes through the capillaries  in tissues, some water along
with many small water soluble substances move out into the spaces
between the cells of tissues leaving the larger proteins and most of the
formed elements in the blood vessels. This fluid released out is called the
interstitial fluid or tissue fluid. It has the same mineral distribution as
that in plasma. Exchange of nutrients, gases, etc., between the blood and
the cells always occur through this fluid. An elaborate network of vessels
called the lymphatic system collects this fluid and drains it back to the
major veins. The fluid present in the lymphatic system is called the lymph.
Lymph is a colourless fluid containing specialised lymphocytes which
are responsible for the immune responses of the body. Lymph is also an
important carrier for nutrients, hormones, etc. Fats are absorbed through
lymph in the lacteals present in the intestinal villi.
15.3
CIRCULATORY PATHWAYS
The circulatory patterns are of two types – open or closed. Open
circulatory system is present in arthropods and molluscs in which blood
pumped by the heart passes through large vessels into open spaces or
body cavities called sinuses. Annelids and chordates have a closed
circulatory system in which the blood pumped by the heart is always
circulated through a closed network of blood vessels. This pattern is
considered to be more advantageous as the flow of fluid can be  more
precisely regulated.
All vertebrates possess a muscular chambered heart. Fishes have a
2-chambered heart with an atrium and a ventricle. Amphibians and the
reptiles (except crocodiles) have a 3-chambered heart with two atria and a
single ventricle, whereas crocodiles, birds and mammals possess a
4-chambered heart with two atria and two ventricles. In fishes the heart
pumps out deoxygenated blood which is oxygenated by the gills and
supplied to the body parts from where deoxygenated blood is returned to
the heart (single circulation). In amphibians and reptiles, the left atrium
receives oxygenated blood from the gills/lungs/skin and the right atrium
gets the deoxygenated blood from other body parts. However, they get mixed
up in the single ventricle which pumps out mixed blood (incomplete double
circulation). In birds and mammals, oxygenated and deoxygenated blood
received by the left and right atria respectively passes on to the ventricles of
the same sides. The ventricles pump it out without any mixing up, i.e., two
separate circulatory pathways are present in these organisms, hence, these
animals have double circulation. Let us study the human circulatory
system.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 15 - Page 6 :
 198
BIOLOGY
15.3.1 Human Circulatory System
Human circulatory system, also called the blood vascular system consists
of a muscular chambered heart, a network of closed branching blood
vessels and blood, the fluid which is circulated.
Heart, the mesodermally derived organ, is situated in the thoracic
cavity, in between the two lungs, slightly tilted to the left. It has the size of
a clenched fist. It is protected by a double walled membranous bag,
pericardium, enclosing the pericardial fluid. Our heart has four
chambers, two relatively small upper  chambers called atria and two larger
lower chambers called ventricles. A thin, muscular wall called the inter-
atrial septum separates the right and the left atria, whereas a thick-walled,
the inter-ventricular septum, separates the left and the right ventricles
(Figure 15.2). The atrium and the ventricle of the same side are also
separated by a thick fibrous tissue called the atrio-ventricular septum.
However, each of these septa are provided with an opening through which
the two chambers of the  same side are connected. The opening between
the right atrium and the right ventricle is guarded by a valve formed of
three  muscular flaps or cusps, the tricuspid valve, whereas a bicuspid
or mitral valve guards the opening between the left atrium and the left
ventricle. The openings of the right and the left ventricles into the
Figure 15.2 Section of a human heart
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 15 - Page 7 :
 BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION
199
pulmonary artery and the aorta respectively are provided with the
semilunar valves. The valves in the heart allows the flow of blood only in
one direction, i.e., from the atria to the ventricles and from the ventricles
to the pulmonary artery or aorta. These valves prevent any backward
flow.
The entire heart is made of cardiac muscles. The walls of ventricles
are much thicker than that of the atria. A specialised cardiac musculature
called the nodal tissue is also distributed in the heart (Figure 15.2). A
patch of this tissue is present in the right upper corner of the right atrium
called the sino-atrial node (SAN). Another mass of this tissue is seen in
the lower left corner of the right atrium close to the atrio-ventricular septum
called the atrio-ventricular node (AVN). A bundle of nodal fibres, atrio-
ventricular bundle (AV bundle) continues from the AVN which passes
through the atrio-ventricular septa to emerge on the top of the inter-
ventricular septum and immediately divides into a right and left bundle.
These branches give rise to minute fibres throughout the ventricular
musculature of the respective sides and are called purkinje fibres.  The
nodal musculature has the ability to generate action potentials without
any external stimuli, i.e., it is autoexcitable. However, the number of action
potentials that could be generated in a minute vary at different parts of
the nodal system. The SAN can generate the maximum number of action
potentials, i.e., 70-75 min–1, and is responsible for initiating and
maintaining the rhythmic contractile activity of the heart. Therefore, it is
called the pacemaker. Our heart normally beats 70-75 times in a minute
(average 72 beats min–1).
15.3.2 Cardiac Cycle
How does the heart function? Let us take a look. To begin with, all the
four chambers of heart are in a relaxed state, i.e., they are in  joint
diastole. As the tricuspid and bicuspid valves are open, blood from the
pulmonary veins and vena cava flows into the left and the right ventricle
respectively through the left and right atria. The semilunar valves are
closed at this stage. The SAN now generates an action potential which
stimulates both the atria to undergo a simultaneous contraction – the
atrial systole. This increases the flow of blood into the ventricles by about
30 per cent. The action potential is conducted to the ventricular side by
the AVN and AV bundle from where the bundle of His transmits it through
the entire ventricular musculature. This causes the ventricular muscles
to contract,  (ventricular systole), the atria undergoes relaxation
(diastole), coinciding with the ventricular systole. Ventricular systole
increases the ventricular pressure causing the closure of tricuspid and
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 15 - Page 8 :
 200
BIOLOGY
bicuspid valves due to attempted backflow of blood into the atria. As
the ventricular pressure increases further, the semilunar valves guarding
the pulmonary artery (right side) and the aorta (left side) are forced open,
allowing the blood in the ventricles to flow through these vessels into
the circulatory pathways. The ventricles now relax (ventricular diastole)
and the ventricular pressure falls causing the closure of semilunar valves
which prevents the backflow of blood into the ventricles. As the
ventricular pressure declines further, the tricuspid and bicuspid valves
are pushed open by the pressure in the atria exerted by the blood which
was being emptied into them by the veins. The blood now once again
moves freely to the ventricles. The ventricles and atria are now again in
a relaxed (joint diastole) state, as earlier. Soon the SAN generates a new
action potential and the events described above are repeated in that
sequence and the process continues.
This sequential event in the heart which is cyclically repeated is called
the cardiac cycle and it consists of systole and diastole of both the atria
and ventricles. As mentioned earlier, the heart beats 72 times  per minute,
i.e., that many cardiac cycles are performed per minute. From this it could
be deduced that the duration of a cardiac cycle is 0.8 seconds. During a
cardiac cycle, each ventricle pumps out approximately 70 mL of blood
which is called the stroke volume. The stroke volume multiplied by the
heart rate (no. of beats per min.) gives the cardiac output. Therefore, the
cardiac output can be defined as the volume of blood pumped out by each
ventricle per minute and averages 5000 mL or 5 litres in a healthy individual.
The body has the ability to alter the stroke volume as well as the heart rate
and thereby the cardiac output. For example, the cardiac output of an
athlete will be much higher than that of an ordinary man.
During each cardiac cycle two prominent sounds are produced which
can be easily heard through a stethoscope. The first heart sound (lub) is
associated with the closure of the tricuspid and bicuspid valves whereas
the second heart sound (dub) is associated with the closure of the
semilunar valves. These sounds are of clinical diagnostic significance.
15.3.3 Electrocardiograph (ECG)
You are probably familiar with this scene from a typical hospital television
show: A patient is hooked up to a monitoring machine that shows voltage
traces on a screen and makes the sound “... pip... pip... pip.....
peeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeee” as the patient goes into cardiac arrest. This type
of machine (electro-cardiograph) is used to obtain an electrocardiogram
(ECG). ECG is a graphical representation of the electrical activity of the
heart during a cardiac cycle. To obtain a standard ECG (as shown in the
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 15 - Page 9 :
 BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION
201
Figure 15.3), a patient is connected to the
machine  with three electrical leads (one to each
wrist and to the left ankle) that continuously
monitor the heart activity. For a detailed
evaluation of the heart’s function, multiple
leads are attached to the chest region. Here,
we will talk only about a standard ECG.
Each peak in the ECG is identified with a
letter from P to T that corresponds to a specific
electrical activity of the heart.
The P-wave represents the electrical
excitation (or depolarisation) of the atria,
which leads to the contraction of both the atria.
The QRS complex represents the depolarisation of the ventricles,
which initiates the ventricular contraction. The contraction starts shortly
after Q and marks the beginning of the systole.
The T-wave represents the return of the ventricles from excited to normal
state (repolarisation). The end of the T-wave marks the end of systole.
Obviously, by counting the number of QRS complexes that occur in a
given time period, one can determine the heart beat rate of an individual.
Since the ECGs obtained from different individuals have roughly the same
shape for a given lead configuration, any deviation from this shape indicates
a possible abnormality or disease. Hence, it is of a great clinical significance.
15.4
DOUBLE CIRCULATION
The blood flows strictly by a fixed route through Blood Vessels—the
arteries and veins. Basically, each artery and vein consists of three layers:
an inner lining of squamous endothelium, the tunica intima, a middle
layer of smooth muscle and elastic fibres, the tunica media, and an
external layer of fibrous connective tissue with collagen fibres, the tunica
externa. The tunica media is comparatively thin in the veins (Figure
15.4).
As mentioned earlier, the blood pumped by the right ventricle enters
the pulmonary artery, whereas the left ventricle pumps blood  into the
aorta. The deoxygenated blood pumped into the pulmonary artery is
passed on to the lungs  from where the oxygenated blood is carried by
the pulmonary veins into the left atrium. This pathway constitutes the
pulmonary circulation. The oxygenated blood entering the aorta is
carried by a network of arteries, arterioles and capillaries to the tissues
from where the deoxygenated blood is collected by a system of venules,
veins and vena cava and emptied into the right atrium. This is the
systemic circulation (Figure 15.4).  The systemic circulation provides
nutrients, O2 and other essential substances to the tissues and takes
CO2 and other harmful substances away for elimination. A unique
vascular connection exists between the digestive tract and liver called
Figure 15.3 Diagrammatic presentation of a
standard ECG
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 15 - Page 10 :
 202
BIOLOGY
hepatic portal system. The hepatic portal vein carries blood from intestine
to the liver before it is delivered to the systemic circulation. A special
coronary system of blood vessels is present in our body exclusively for
the circulation of blood to and from the cardiac musculature.
15.5
REGULATION OF CARDIAC ACTIVITY
Normal activities of the heart are regulated intrinsically, i.e., auto regulated
by specialised muscles (nodal tissue), hence the heart is called myogenic.
A special neural centre in the medulla oblangata can moderate the cardiac
function through autonomic nervous system (ANS). Neural signals through
the sympathetic nerves (part of ANS) can increase the rate of heart beat,
the strength of ventricular contraction and thereby the cardiac output.
On the other hand, parasympathetic neural signals (another component
of ANS) decrease the rate of heart beat, speed of conduction of action
potential and thereby the cardiac output. Adrenal medullary hormones
can also increase the cardiac output.
15.6
DISORDERS OF CIRCULATORY SYSTEM
High Blood Pressure (Hypertension): Hypertension is the term for
blood pressure that is higher than normal (120/80). In this measurement
120 mm Hg (millimetres of mercury pressure) is the systolic, or pumping,
pressure and  80 mm Hg is the diastolic, or resting, pressure. If repeated
checks of blood pressure of an individual is 140/90 (140 over 90) or
Figure 15.4 Schematic plan of blood circulation in human
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 15 - Page 11 :
 BODY FLUIDS AND CIRCULATION
203
higher, it shows hypertension. High blood pressure leads to heart diseases
and also affects vital organs like brain and kidney.
Coronary Artery Disease (CAD): Coronary Artery Disease, often referred
to as atherosclerosis, affects the vessels that supply blood to the heart
muscle. It is caused by deposits of calcium, fat, cholesterol and fibrous
tissues, which makes the lumen of arteries narrower.
Angina: It is also called ‘angina pectoris’. A symptom of acute chest pain
appears when no enough oxygen is reaching the heart muscle. Angina
can occur in men and women of any age but it is more common among
the middle-aged and elderly. It occurs due to conditions that affect the
blood flow.
Heart Failure: Heart failure means the state of heart when it is not pumping
blood effectively enough to meet the needs of the body. It is sometimes
called congestive heart failure because congestion of the lungs is one of
the main symptoms of this disease. Heart failure is not the same as cardiac
arrest (when the heart stops beating) or a heart attack (when the heart
muscle is suddenly damaged by an inadequate blood supply).
SUMMARY
Vertebrates circulate blood, a fluid connective tissue, in their body, to transport essential
substances to the cells and to carry waste substances from there. Another fluid, lymph
(tissue fluid) is also used for the transport of certain substances.
Blood comprises of a fluid matrix, plasma and formed elements. Red blood cells (RBCs,
erythrocytes), white blood cells (WBCs, leucocytes) and platelets (thrombocytes) constitute
the formed elements. Blood of humans are grouped into A, B, AB and O systems based
on the presence or absence of two surface antigens, A, B on the RBCs. Another blood
grouping is also done based on the presence or absence of another antigen called Rhesus
factor (Rh) on the surface of RBCs. The spaces between cells in the tissues contain a fluid
derived from blood called tissue fluid. This fluid called lymph is almost similar to blood
except for the protein content and the formed elements.
All vertebrates and a few invertebrates have a closed circulatory system. Our circulatory
system consists of a muscular pumping organ, heart, a network of vessels and a fluid, blood.
Heart has two atria and two ventricles. Cardiac musculature is auto-excitable. Sino-atrial node
(SAN) generates the maximum number of action protentials per minute (70-75/min) and
therefore, it sets the pace of the activities of the heart. Hence it is called the Pacemaker. The
action potential causes the atria and then the ventricles to undergo contraction (systole) followed
by their relaxation (diastole). The systole forces the blood to move from the atria to the ventricles
and to the pulmonary artery and the aorta. The cardiac cycle is formed by sequential events in
the heart which is cyclically repeated and is called the cardiac cycle. A healthy person shows 72
such cycles per minute. About 70 mL of blood is pumped out by each ventricle during a
cardiac cycle and it is called the stroke or beat volume. Volume of blood pumped out by each
ventricle of heart per minute is called the cardiac output and it is equal to the product of stroke
volume and heart rate (approx 5 litres). The electrical activity of the heart can be recorded from
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 15 - Page 12 :
 204
BIOLOGY
the body surface by using electrocardiograph and the recording is called
electrocardiogram (ECG) which is of clinical importance.
We have a complete double circulation, i.e., two circulatory pathways, namely,
pulmonary and systemic are present. The pulmonary circulation starts by the
pumping of deoxygenated blood by the right ventricle which is carried to the lungs
where it is oxygenated and returned to the left atrium. The systemic circulation
starts with the pumping of oxygenated blood by the left ventricle to the aorta
which is carried to all the body tissues and the deoxygenated blood from there is
collected by the veins and returned to the right atrium. Though the heart is
autoexcitable, its functions can be moderated by neural and hormonal mechanisms.
EXERCISES
1.
Name the components of the formed elements in the blood and mention one
major function of each of them.
2.
What is the importance of plasma proteins?
3.
Match Column I with Column II :
Column I
Column II
(a) Eosinophils
(i) Coagulation
(b) RBC
(ii) Universal Recipient
(c) AB Group
(iii) Resist Infections
(d) Platelets
(iv) Contraction of Heart
(e) Systole
(v) Gas transport
4.
Why do we consider blood as a connective tissue?
5.
What is the difference between lymph and blood?
6.
What is meant by double circulation? What is its significance?
7.
Write the differences between :
(a) Blood and Lymph
(b) Open and Closed system of circulation
(c) Systole and Diastole
(d) P-wave and T-wave
8.
Describe the evolutionary change in the pattern of heart among the vertebrates.
9.
Why do we call our heart myogenic?
10.
Sino-atrial node is called the pacemaker of our heart. Why?
11.
What is the significance of atrio-ventricular node and atrio-ventricular bundle
in the functioning of heart?
12.
Define a cardiac cycle and the cardiac output.
13.
Explain heart sounds.
14.
Draw a standard ECG and explain the different segments in it.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 14 - Page 1 :
 UNIT 5
The reductionist  approach to study of life forms resulted in increasing
use of physico-chemical concepts and techniques. Majority of these
studies employed either surviving tissue model or straightaway cell-
free systems. An explosion of knowledge resulted in molecular biology.
Molecular physiology became almost synonymous with biochemistry
and biophysics. However, it is now being increasingly realised that
neither a purely organismic approach nor a purely reductionistic
molecular approach would reveal the truth about biological processes
or living phenomena. Systems biology makes us believe that all living
phenomena are emergent properties due to interaction among
components of the system under study. Regulatory network of
molecules, supra molecular assemblies, cells, tissues, organisms and
indeed, populations and communities, each create emergent
properties. In the chapters under this unit, major human physiological
processes like, exchange of gases, blood circulation, locomotion and
movement are described in cellular and molecular terms. The last
two chapters point to the coordination and regulation of body events
at the organismic level.
HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY
Chapter 14
Breathing and Exchange
of Gases
Chapter 15
Body Fluids and
Circulation
Chapter 16
Excretory Products and
their Elimination
Chapter 17
Locomotion and Movement
Chapter 18
Neural Control and
Coordination
Chapter 19
Chemical Coordination
and Integration
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 14 - Page 2 :
 ALFONSO CORTI, Italian anatomist, was born in 1822. Corti began
his scientific career studying the cardiovascular systems of
reptiles. Later, he turned his attention to the mammalian
auditory system. In 1851, he published a paper describing a
structure located on the basilar membrane of the cochlea
containing hair cells that convert sound vibrations into nerve
impulses, the organ of Corti. He died in the year 1888.
Alfonso Corti
(1822 – 1888)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 14 - Page 3 :
 183
BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES
As you have read earlier, oxygen (O2) is utilised by the organisms to
indirectly break down simple molecules like glucose, amino acids, fatty
acids, etc., to derive energy to perform various activities. Carbon dioxide
(CO2) which is harmful is also released during the above catabolic
reactions. It is, therefore, evident that O2  has to be continuously provided
to the cells and CO2 produced by the cells have to be released out. This
process of exchange of O2 from the atmosphere with CO2 produced by the
cells is called breathing, commonly known as respiration. Place your
hands on your chest; you can feel the chest moving up and down. You
know that it is due to breathing. How do we breathe? The respiratory
organs and the mechanism of breathing are described in the following
sections of this chapter.
14.1
RESPIRATORY ORGANS
Mechanisms of breathing vary among different groups of animals
depending mainly on their habitats and levels of organisation. Lower
invertebrates like sponges, coelenterates, flatworms, etc., exchange O2
with CO2 by simple diffusion over their entire body surface. Earthworms
use their moist cuticle and insects have a network of tubes (tracheal
tubes) to transport atmospheric air within the body. Special vascularised
structures called gills (branchial respiration) are used by most of the
aquatic arthropods and molluscs whereas vascularised bags called lungs
(pulmonary respiration) are used by the terrestrial forms for the exchange
of gases. Among vertebrates, fishes use gills whereas amphibians, reptiles,
birds and mammals respire through lungs. Amphibians like frogs can
respire through their moist skin (cutaneous respiration) also.
BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES
CHAPTER  14
14.1 Respiratory
Organs
14.2 Mechanism of
Breathing
14.3 Exchange of
Gases
14.4 Transport of
Gases
14.5 Regulation of
Respiration
14.6 Disorders of
Respiratory
System
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 14 - Page 4 :
 184
BIOLOGY
14.1.1 Human Respiratory System
We have a pair of external nostrils opening out above the upper lips.
It leads to a nasal chamber through the nasal passage. The nasal
chamber opens into the pharynx, a portion of which is the common
passage for food and air. The pharynx opens through the larynx region
into the trachea. Larynx is a cartilaginous box which helps in sound
production and hence called the sound box. During swallowing glottis
can be covered by a thin elastic cartilaginous flap called epiglottis  to
prevent the entry of food into the larynx. Trachea is a straight tube
extending up to the mid-thoracic cavity, which divides at the level of
5th thoracic vertebra into a right and left primary bronchi. Each bronchi
undergoes repeated divisions to form the secondary and tertiary bronchi
and bronchioles ending up in very thin terminal bronchioles. The
tracheae, primary, secondary and tertiary bronchi, and initial
bronchioles are supported by incomplete cartilaginous rings. Each
terminal bronchiole gives rise to a number of very thin, irregular-walled
and vascularised bag-like structures called alveoli. The branching
network of bronchi, bronchioles and alveoli comprise the lungs (Figure
14.1). We have two lungs which are covered by a double layered pleura,
with pleural fluid between them. It reduces friction on the lung-surface.
The outer pleural membrane is in close contact with the thoracic
Bronchus
Lung
heart
Diaphragm
Epiglottis
Larynx
Trachea
Cut end of rib
Pleural membranes
Alveoli
Pleural fluid
Bronchiole
Figure 14.1
Diagrammatic view of human respiratory system (sectional view of
the left lung is also shown)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 14 - Page 5 :
 185
BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES
lining whereas the inner pleural membrane is in contact with the lung
surface. The part starting with the external nostrils up to the terminal
bronchioles constitute the conducting part whereas the alveoli and their
ducts form the respiratory or exchange part of the respiratory system.
The conducting part transports the atmospheric air to the alveoli, clears
it from foreign particles, humidifies and also brings the air to body
temperature. Exchange part is the site of actual diffusion of O2 and CO2
between blood and atmospheric air.
The lungs are situated in the thoracic chamber which is anatomically
an air-tight chamber. The thoracic chamber is formed dorsally by the
vertebral column, ventrally by the sternum, laterally by the ribs and on
the lower side by the dome-shaped diaphragm. The anatomical setup of
lungs in thorax is such that any change in the volume of the thoracic
cavity will be reflected in the lung (pulmonary) cavity. Such an
arrangement is essential for breathing, as we cannot directly alter the
pulmonary volume.
Respiration involves the following steps:
(i)
Breathing or pulmonary ventilation by which atmospheric air
is drawn in and CO2 rich alveolar air is released out.
(ii)
Diffusion of gases (O2 and CO2) across alveolar membrane.
(iii)
Transport of gases by the blood.
(iv)
Diffusion of O2 and CO2 between blood and tissues.
(v)
Utilisation of O2 by the cells for catabolic reactions and resultant
release of CO2 (cellular respiration as dealt in the Chapter 12).
14.2
MECHANISM OF BREATHING
Breathing involves two stages : inspiration during which atmospheric
air is drawn in and expiration by which the alveolar air is released out.
The movement of air into and out of the lungs is carried out by creating a
pressure gradient between the lungs and the atmosphere. Inspiration
can occur if the pressure within the lungs (intra-pulmonary pressure) is
less than the atmospheric pressure, i.e., there is a negative pressure in
the lungs with respect to atmospheric pressure. Similarly, expiration takes
place when the intra-pulmonary pressure is higher than the atmospheric
pressure. The diaphragm and a specialised set of muscles – external and
internal intercostals between the ribs, help in generation of such gradients.
Inspiration is initiated by the contraction of diaphragm which increases
the volume of thoracic chamber in the antero-posterior axis. The
contraction of external inter-costal muscles lifts up the ribs and the
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 14 - Page 6 :
 186
BIOLOGY
sternum causing an increase in the volume of
the thoracic chamber in the  dorso-ventral axis.
The overall increase in the thoracic volume
causes a similar increase in pulmonary
volume. An increase in pulmonary volume
decreases the intra-pulmonary pressure to less
than the atmospheric pressure which forces
the air from outside to move into the lungs,
i.e., inspiration (Figure 14.2a). Relaxation of
the diaphragm and the inter-costal muscles
returns the diaphragm and sternum to their
normal positions and reduce the thoracic
volume and thereby the pulmonary volume.
This leads to an increase in intra-pulmonary
pressure to slightly above the atmospheric
pressure causing the expulsion of air from the
lungs, i.e., expiration (Figure 14.2b). We have
the ability to increase the strength of
inspiration and expiration with the help of
additional muscles in the abdomen. On an
average, a healthy human breathes 12-16
times/minute. The volume of air involved in
breathing movements can be estimated by
using a spirometer which helps in clinical
assessment of pulmonary functions.
14.2.1 Respiratory Volumes and
Capacities
Tidal Volume (TV): Volume of air inspired or
expired during a normal respiration. It is
approx. 500 mL., i.e., a healthy man can
inspire or expire approximately 6000 to 8000
mL of air per minute.
Inspiratory Reserve Volume (IRV):
Additional volume of air, a person can inspire
by a forcible inspiration. This averages 2500
mL to 3000 mL.
Expiratory Reserve Volume (ERV):
Additional volume of air, a person can expire
by a forcible expiration. This averages 1000
mL to 1100 mL.
Figure 14.2  Mechanism of breathing showing :
(a) inspiration  (b) expiration
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 14 - Page 7 :
 187
BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES
Residual Volume (RV): Volume of air remaining in the lungs even after a
forcible expiration. This averages 1100 mL to 1200 mL.
By adding up a few respiratory volumes described above, one can
derive various pulmonary capacities, which can be used in clinical
diagnosis.
Inspiratory Capacity (IC): Total volume of air a person can inspire
after a normal expiration. This includes tidal volume and inspiratory
reserve volume ( TV+IRV).
Expiratory Capacity (EC): Total volume of air a person can expire after
a normal inspiration. This includes tidal volume and expiratory reserve
volume (TV+ERV).
Functional Residual Capacity (FRC): Volume of air that will remain in
the lungs after a normal expiration. This includes ERV+RV.
Vital Capacity (VC): The maximum volume of air a person can breathe in
after a forced expiration. This includes ERV, TV and IRV or the maximum
volume of air a person can breathe out after a forced inspiration.
Total Lung Capacity (TLC): Total volume of air accommodated in the
lungs at the end of a forced inspiration. This includes RV, ERV, TV and
IRV or vital capacity + residual volume.
14.3
EXCHANGE OF GASES
Alveoli are the primary sites of exchange of gases. Exchange of gases also
occur between blood and tissues. O2 and CO2 are exchanged in these
sites by simple diffusion mainly based on pressure/concentration
gradient. Solubility of the gases as well as the thickness of the membranes
involved in diffusion are also some important factors that can affect the
rate of diffusion.
Pressure contributed by an individual gas in a mixture of gases is
called partial pressure and is represented as pO2 for oxygen and pCO2 for
carbon dioxide. Partial pressures of these two gases in the atmospheric
air and the two sites of diffusion are given in Table 14.1 and in
Figure 14.3. The data given in the table clearly indicates a concentration
gradient for oxygen from alveoli to blood and blood to tissues. Similarly,
TABLE 14.1 Partial Pressures (in mm Hg) of Oxygen and Carbon dioxide at Different
Parts Involved in Diffusion in Comparison to those in Atmosphere
Respiratory
Atmospheric
Alveoli
Blood
Blood
Tissues
Gas
Air
(Deoxygenated)
(Oxygenated)
O2
159
104
40
95
40
CO2
0.3
40
45
40
45
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 14 - Page 8 :
 188
BIOLOGY
a gradient is present for CO2 in the opposite direction, i.e., from tissues to
blood and blood to alveoli. As the solubility of CO2 is 20-25 times higher
than that of O2, the amount of CO2 that can diffuse through the diffusion
membrane per unit difference in partial pressure is much higher compared
to that of O2. The diffusion membrane
is made up of three major layers
(Figure 14.4) namely, the thin squamous
epithelium of alveoli, the endothelium of
alveolar capillaries and the basement
substance (composed of a thin basement
membrane supporting the squamous
epithelium and the basement membrane
surrounding the single layer endothelial
cells of capillaries)  in between them.
However, its total thickness is much less
than a millimetre. Therefore, all the factors
in our body are favourable for diffusion of
O2 from alveoli to tissues and that of CO2
from tissues to alveoli.
Figure 14.4
A Diagram of a section of an
alveolus with a pulmonary
capillary.
Figure 14.3
Diagrammatic representation of exchange of gases at the alveolus and
the body tissues with blood and transport of oxygen and carbon dioxide
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 14 - Page 9 :
 189
BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES
14.4
TRANSPORT OF GASES
Blood is the medium of transport for O2 and CO2. About 97 per cent of O2 is
transported by RBCs in the blood. The remaining 3 per cent of O2 is carried
in a dissolved state through the plasma. Nearly 20-25 per cent of CO2 is
transported by RBCs whereas 70 per cent of it is carried as bicarbonate.
About 7 per cent of CO2 is carried in a dissolved state through plasma.
14.4.1 Transport of Oxygen
Haemoglobin is a red coloured iron containing pigment present in the
RBCs. O2 can bind with haemoglobin in a reversible manner to form
oxyhaemoglobin. Each haemoglobin molecule can carry a maximum of
four molecules of O2. Binding of oxygen with haemoglobin is primarily
related to partial pressure of O2. Partial pressure of CO2, hydrogen ion
concentration and temperature are the other factors which can interfere
with this binding. A sigmoid curve is obtained when percentage saturation
of haemoglobin with O2 is plotted against the
pO 2. This curve is called the Oxygen
dissociation curve (Figure 14.5) and is highly
useful in studying the effect of factors like
pCO2, H+ concentration, etc., on binding of O2
with haemoglobin. In the alveoli, where there
is high pO2, low pCO2, lesser H+ concentration
and lower temperature, the factors are
all favourable for the formation of
oxyhaemoglobin, whereas in the tissues,
where low pO2, high pCO2, high H +
concentration and higher temperature exist,
the conditions are favourable for dissociation
of oxygen from the oxyhaemoglobin. This
clearly indicates that O2 gets bound to
haemoglobin in the lung surface and gets
dissociated at the tissues. Every 100 ml of
oxygenated blood can deliver around 5 ml of
O2 to the tissues under normal physiological
conditions.
14.4.2   Transport of Carbon dioxide
CO2 is carried by haemoglobin as carbamino-haemoglobin (about
20-25 per cent). This binding is related to the partial pressure of CO2.
pO2 is a major factor which could affect this binding. When pCO2 is high
and pO2 is low as in the tissues, more binding of carbon dioxide occurs
whereas, when the pCO2 is low and pO2 is high as in the alveoli, dissociation
20
0
20
40
40
60
60
80
80
100
100
Partial pressure of oxygen (mm Hg)
Percentage saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen
Figure 14.5  Oxygen dissociation curve
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 14 - Page 10 :
 190
BIOLOGY
of CO2 from carbamino-haemoglobin takes place, i.e., CO2 which is bound
to haemoglobin from the tissues is delivered at the alveoli. RBCs contain
a very high concentration of the enzyme, carbonic anhydrase and minute
quantities of the same is present in the plasma too. This enzyme facilitates
the following reaction in both directions.
CO
H O
H CO
Carbonic
anhydrase
Carbonic
anhydra
2
2
2
3
+

→

←


sse
HCO
H

→

←


+
−
+
3
At the tissue site where partial pressure of CO2 is high due to
catabolism, CO2 diffuses into blood (RBCs and plasma) and forms HCO3
–
and H+,. At the alveolar site where pCO2 is low, the reaction proceeds in
the opposite direction leading to the formation of CO2 and H2O. Thus,
CO2 trapped as bicarbonate at the tissue level and transported to the
alveoli is released out as CO2 (Figure 14.4). Every 100 ml of deoxygenated
blood delivers approximately 4 ml of CO2 to the alveoli.
14.5
REGULATION OF RESPIRATION
Human beings have a significant ability to maintain and moderate the
respiratory rhythm to suit the demands of the body tissues. This is done
by the neural system. A specialised centre present in the medulla region
of the brain called respiratory rhythm centre is primarily responsible for
this regulation. Another centre present in the pons region of the brain
called pneumotaxic centre can moderate the functions of the respiratory
rhythm centre. Neural signal from this centre can reduce the duration of
inspiration and thereby alter the respiratory rate. A chemosensitive area
is situated adjacent to the rhythm centre which is highly sensitive to CO2
and hydrogen ions. Increase in these substances can activate this centre,
which in turn can signal the rhythm centre to make necessary adjustments
in the respiratory process by which these substances can be eliminated.
Receptors associated with aortic arch and carotid artery also can recognise
changes in CO2 and H+ concentration and send necessary signals to the
rhythm centre for remedial actions. The role of oxygen in the regulation of
respiratory rhythm is quite insignificant.
14.6
DISORDERS OF RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Asthma is a difficulty in breathing causing wheezing due to inflammation
of bronchi and bronchioles.
Emphysema is a chronic disorder in which alveolar walls are damaged
due to which respiratory surface is decreased. One of the major causes of
this is cigarette smoking.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 14 - Page 11 :
 191
BREATHING AND EXCHANGE OF GASES
SUMMARY
Cells utilise oxygen for metabolism and produce energy along with substances
like carbon dioxide which is harmful. Animals have evolved different mechanisms
for the transport of oxygen to the cells and for the removal of carbon dioxide from
there. We have a well developed respiratory system comprising two lungs and
associated air passages to perform this function.
The first step in respiration is breathing by which atmospheric air is taken in
(inspiration) and the alveolar air is released out (expiration). Exchange of O2 and
CO2 between deoxygenated blood and alveoli, transport of these gases throughout
the body by blood, exchange of O2 and CO2 between the oxygenated blood and
tissues and utilisation of O2 by the cells (cellular respiration) are the other steps
involved.
Inspiration and expiration are carried out by creating pressure gradients
between the atmosphere and the alveoli with the help of specialised muscles –
intercostals and diaphragm. Volumes of air involved in these activities can be
estimated with the help of spirometer and are of clinical significance.
Exchange of O2 and CO2 at the alveoli and tissues occur by diffusion. Rate of
diffusion is dependent on the partial pressure gradients of O2 (pO2) and CO2 (pCO2),
their solubility as well as the thickness of the diffusion surface. These factors in
our body facilitate diffusion of O2 from the alveoli to the deoxygenated blood as
well as from the oxygenated blood to the tissues. The factors are favourable for the
diffusion of CO2 in the opposite direction, i.e., from tissues to alveoli.
Oxygen is transported mainly as oxyhaemoglobin. In the alveoli where pO2 is
higher, O2 gets bound to haemoglobin which is easily dissociated at the tissues
where pO2 is low and pCO2 and H+ concentration are high. Nearly 70 per cent of
carbon dioxide is transported as bicarbonate (HCO3
–) with the help of the enzyme
carbonic anhydrase. 20-25 per cent of carbon dioxide is carried by haemoglobin
as carbamino-haemoglobin. In the tissues where pCO2 is high, it gets bound to
blood whereas in the alveoli where pCO2 is low and pO2 is high, it gets removed
from the blood.
Respiratory rhythm is maintained by the respiratory centre in the medulla
region of brain. A pneumotaxic centre in the pons region of the brain and a
chemosensitive area in the medulla can alter respiratory mechanism.
Occupational Respiratory Disorders: In certain industries, especially
those involving grinding or stone-breaking, so much dust is produced
that the defense mechanism of the body cannot fully cope with the
situation. Long exposure can give rise to inflammation leading to fibrosis
(proliferation of fibrous tissues) and thus causing serious lung damage.
Workers in such industries should wear protective masks.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 14 - Page 12 :
 192
BIOLOGY
EXERCISES
1.
Define vital capacity. What is its significance?
2.
State the volume of air remaining in the lungs after a normal breathing.
3.
Diffusion of gases occurs in the alveolar region only and not in the other parts of
respiratory system. Why?
4.
What are the major transport mechanisms for CO2? Explain.
5.
What will be the pO2 and pCO2 in the atmospheric air compared to those in the
alveolar air ?
(i)
pO2 lesser, pCO2 higher
(ii)
pO2 higher, pCO2 lesser
(iii)
pO2 higher, pCO2 higher
(iv)
pO2 lesser, pCO2 lesser
6.
Explain the process of inspiration under normal conditions.
7.
How is respiration regulated?
8.
What is the effect of pCO2 on oxygen transport?
9.
What happens to the respiratory process in a man going up a hill?
10.
What is the site of gaseous exchange in an insect?
11.
Define oxygen dissociation curve. Can you suggest any reason for its sigmoidal
pattern?
12.
Have you heard about hypoxia? Try to gather information about it, and discuss
with your friends.
13.
Distinguish between
(a) IRV and ERV
(b) Inspiratory capacity and Expiratory capacity.
(c) Vital capacity and Total lung capacity.
14.
What is Tidal volume? Find out the Tidal volume (approximate value) for a healthy
human in an hour.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 16 - Page 1 :
 EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION
205
Animals accumulate ammonia, urea, uric acid, carbon dioxide, water
and ions like Na+, K+, Cl–, phosphate, sulphate, etc., either by metabolic
activities or by other means like excess ingestion. These substances have
to be removed totally or partially. In this chapter, you will learn the
mechanisms of elimination of these substances with special emphasis on
common nitrogenous wastes. Ammonia, urea and uric acid are the major
forms of nitrogenous wastes excreted by the animals. Ammonia is the
most toxic form and requires large amount of water for its elimination,
whereas uric acid, being the least toxic, can be removed with a minimum
loss of water.
The process of excreting ammonia is Ammonotelism. Many bony fishes,
aquatic amphibians and aquatic insects are ammonotelic
ammonotelic
ammonotelic
ammonotelic
ammonotelic in nature.
Ammonia, as it is readily soluble, is generally excreted by diffusion across
body surfaces or through gill surfaces (in fish) as ammonium ions. Kidneys
do not play any significant role in its removal. Terrestrial adaptation
necessitated the production of lesser toxic nitrogenous wastes like urea
and uric acid for conservation of water. Mammals, many terrestrial
amphibians and marine fishes mainly excrete urea and are called ureotelic
ureotelic
ureotelic
ureotelic
ureotelic
animals. Ammonia produced by metabolism is converted into urea in the
liver of these animals and released into the blood which is filtered and
excreted out by the kidneys. Some amount of urea may be retained in the
kidney matrix of some of these animals to maintain a desired osmolarity.
Reptiles, birds, land snails and insects excrete nitrogenous wastes as uric
acid in the form of pellet or paste with a minimum loss of water and are
called uricotelic
uricotelic
uricotelic
uricotelic
uricotelic animals.
EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND
THEIR ELIMINATION
CHAPTER  16
16.1 Human
Excretory
System
16.2 Urine Formation
16.3 Function of the
Tubules
16.4 Mechanism of
Concentration
of the Filtrate
16.5 Regulation of
Kidney Function
16.6 Micturition
16.7 Role of other
Organs in
Excretion
16.8 Disorders of the
Excretory
System
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 16 - Page 2 :
 206
BIOLOGY
A survey of animal kingdom presents a variety of excretory structures.
In most of the invertebrates, these structures  are simple tubular forms
whereas vertebrates have complex tubular organs called kidneys. Some
of these structures are mentioned here. Protonephridia or flame cells are
the excretory structures in Platyhelminthes (Flatworms, e.g., Planaria),
rotifers, some annelids and the cephalochordate – Amphioxus.
Protonephridia are primarily concerned with ionic and fluid volume
regulation, i.e., osmoregulation. Nephridia are the tubular excretory
structures of earthworms and other annelids. Nephridia help to remove
nitrogenous wastes and maintain a fluid and ionic balance. Malpighian
tubules are the excretory structures of most of the insects including
cockroaches. Malpighian tubules help in the removal of nitrogenous
wastes and osmoregulation. Antennal glands or green glands perform
the excretory function in crustaceans like prawns.
16.1 HUMAN EXCRETORY SYSTEM
In humans, the excretory system consists
of a pair of kidneys, one pair of ureters, a
urinary bladder and a urethra (Figure
16.1). Kidneys are reddish brown, bean
shaped structures situated between the
levels of last thoracic and third lumbar
vertebra close to the dorsal inner wall of
the abdominal cavity. Each kidney of an
adult human measures 10-12 cm in
length, 5-7 cm in width, 2-3 cm in
thickness with an average weight of 120-
170 g. Towards the centre of the inner
concave surface of the kidney is a notch
called hilum through which ureter, blood
vessels and nerves enter. Inner to the hilum
is a broad funnel shaped space called the
renal pelvis with projections called calyces.
The outer layer of kidney is a tough
capsule. Inside the kidney, there are two
zones, an outer cortex and an inner
medulla. The medulla is divided into a few
conical masses (medullary pyramids)
projecting into the calyces (sing.: calyx).
The cortex extends in between the
Figure 16.1 Human Urinary system
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 16 - Page 3 :
 EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION
207
Figure 16.3
A diagrammatic representation of a nephron showing blood vessels,
duct and tubule
medullary pyramids as renal columns called
Columns of Bertini (Figure 16.2).
Each kidney has nearly one million
complex tubular structures called nephrons
(Figure 16.3), which are the functional units.
Each nephron has two parts – the
glomerulus and the renal tubule.
Glomerulus is a tuft of capillaries formed by
the afferent arteriole – a fine branch of renal
artery. Blood from the glomerulus is carried
away by an efferent arteriole.
The renal tubule begins with a double
walled cup-like structure called Bowman’s
capsule, which encloses the glomerulus.
Glomerulus alongwith Bowman’s capsule, is
called the malpighian body or renal
corpuscle (Figure 16.4). The tubule
continues further to form a highly coiled
network – proximal convoluted tubule
Figure 16.2 Longitudinal section (Diagrammatic)
of Kidney
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 16 - Page 4 :
 208
BIOLOGY
(PCT). A hairpin shaped Henle’s loop is
the next part of the tubule which has a
descending and an ascending limb. The
ascending limb continues as another highly
coiled tubular region called distal
convoluted tubule (DCT). The DCTs of
many nephrons open into a straight tube
called collecting duct, many of which
converge and open into the renal pelvis
through medullary pyramids in the
calyces.
The Malpighian corpuscle, PCT and
DCT of the nephron are situated in the
cortical region of the kidney whereas the
loop of Henle dips into the medulla. In
majority of nephrons, the loop of Henle is
too short and extends only very little into
the medulla. Such nephrons are called
cortical nephrons. In some of the nephrons,
the loop of Henle is very long and runs deep into the medulla. These
nephrons are called juxta medullary nephrons.
The efferent arteriole emerging from the glomerulus forms a fine
capillary network around the renal tubule called the peritubular
capillaries. A minute vessel of this network runs parallel to the Henle’s
loop forming a ‘U’ shaped vasa recta.  Vasa recta is absent or highly
reduced in cortical nephrons.
16.2
URINE FORMATION
Urine formation involves three main processes namely, glomerular
filtration, reabsorption and secretion, that takes place in different parts of
the nephron.
The first step in urine formation is the filtration of blood, which is carried
out by the glomerulus and is called glomerular filtration. On an average,
1100-1200 ml of blood is filtered by the kidneys per minute which constitute
roughly 1/5th of the blood pumped out by each ventricle of the heart in a
minute. The glomerular capillary blood pressure causes filtration of blood
through 3 layers, i.e., the endothelium of glomerular blood vessels, the
epithelium of Bowman’s capsule and a basement membrane between these
two layers. The epithelial cells of Bowman’s capsule called podocytes are
arranged in an intricate manner so as to leave some minute spaces called
filtration slits or slit pores. Blood is filtered so finely through these
membranes, that almost all the constituents of the plasma except the
proteins pass onto the lumen of the Bowman’s capsule. Therefore, it is
considered as a process of ultra filtration.
Afferent arteriole
Efferent
arteriole
Bowman’s
capsule
Proximal
convoluted	tubule
Figure 16.4 Malpighian body (renal corpuscle)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 16 - Page 5 :
 EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION
209
The amount of the filtrate formed by the kidneys per minute is called
glomerular filtration rate (GFR). GFR in a healthy individual is
approximately 125 ml/minute, i.e., 180 litres per day !
The kidneys have built-in mechanisms for the regulation of glomerular
filtration rate. One such efficient mechanism is carried out by juxta
glomerular apparatus (JGA). JGA is a special sensitive region formed by
cellular modifications in the distal convoluted tubule and the afferent
arteriole at the location of their contact. A fall in GFR can activate the JG
cells to release renin which can stimulate the glomerular blood flow and
thereby the GFR back to normal.
A comparison of the volume of the filtrate formed per day (180 litres
per day) with that of the urine released (1.5 litres), suggest that nearly 99
per cent of the filtrate has to be reabsorbed by the renal tubules. This
process is called reabsorption. The tubular epithelial cells in different
segments of nephron perform this either by active or passive mechanisms.
For example, substances like glucose, amino acids, Na+, etc., in the filtrate
are reabsorbed actively whereas the nitrogenous wastes are absorbed by
passive transport. Reabsorption of water also occurs passively in the initial
segments of the nephron (Figure 16.5).
During urine formation, the tubular cells secrete substances like H+,
K+ and ammonia into the filtrate. Tubular secretion is also an important
step in urine formation as it helps in the maintenance of ionic and acid
base balance of body fluids.
16.3
FUNCTION OF THE TUBULES
Proximal Convoluted Tubule (PCT): PCT is lined by simple cuboidal
brush border epithelium which increases the surface area for reabsorption.
Nearly all of the essential nutrients, and 70-80 per cent of electrolytes
and water are reabsorbed by this segment. PCT also helps to maintain
the pH and ionic balance of the body fluids by selective secretion of
hydrogen ions and ammonia into the filtrate and by absorption of
HCO3
– from it.
Henle’s Loop: Reabsorption is minimum in its ascending limb.
However, this region plays a significant role in the maintenance of high
osmolarity of medullary interstitial fluid. The descending limb of loop of
Henle is permeable to water but almost impermeable to electrolytes. This
concentrates the filtrate as it moves down. The ascending limb is
impermeable to water but allows transport of electrolytes actively or
passively. Therefore, as the concentrated filtrate pass upward, it gets
diluted due to the passage of electrolytes to the medullary fluid.
Distal Convoluted Tubule (DCT): Conditional reabsorption of Na+
and water takes place in this segment. DCT is also capable of reabsorption
of HCO3
– and selective secretion of hydrogen and potassium ions and
NH3 to maintain the pH and sodium-potassium balance in blood.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 16 - Page 6 :
 210
BIOLOGY
Collecting Duct: This long duct extends from the cortex of the kidney
to the inner parts of the medulla. Large amounts of water could be
reabsorbed from this region to produce a concentrated urine. This segment
allows passage of small amounts of urea into the medullary interstitium
to keep up the osmolarity. It also plays a role in the maintenance of pH
and ionic balance of blood by the selective secretion of H+ and K+ ions
(Figure 16.5).
16.4
MECHANISM OF CONCENTRATION OF THE FILTRATE
Mammals have the ability to produce a concentrated urine. The Henle’s
loop and vasa recta play a significant role in this. The flow of filtrate in
the two limbs of Henle’s loop is in opposite directions and thus forms a
counter current. The flow of blood through the two limbs of vasa recta is
Figure 16.5 Reabsorption and secretion of major substances at different parts of
the nephron (Arrows indicate direction of movement of materials.)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 16 - Page 7 :
 EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION
211
also in a counter current pattern. The proximity between the Henle’s loop
and vasa recta, as well as the counter current in them help in maintaining
an increasing osmolarity towards the inner medullary interstitium, i.e.,
from 300 mOsmolL–1 in the cortex to about 1200 mOsmolL–1 in the inner
medulla. This gradient is mainly caused by NaCl and urea. NaCl is
transported by the ascending limb of Henle’s loop which is exchanged
with the descending limb of vasa recta. NaCl is returned to the interstitium
by the ascending portion of vasa recta. Similarly, small amounts of urea
enter the thin segment of the ascending limb of Henle’s loop which is
transported back to the interstitium by the collecting tubule. The above
described transport of substances facilitated by the special arrangement
of Henle’s loop and vasa recta is called the counter current mechanism
(Figure. 16.6). This mechanism helps to maintain a concentration gradient
Figure 16.6 Diagrammatic representation of a nephron and vasa recta showing
counter current mechanisms
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 16 - Page 8 :
 212
BIOLOGY
in the medullary interstitium. Presence of such interstitial gradient helps
in an easy passage of water from the collecting tubule thereby
concentrating the filtrate (urine). Human kidneys can produce urine nearly
four times concentrated than the initial filtrate formed.
16.5
REGULATION OF KIDNEY FUNCTION
The functioning of the kidneys is efficiently monitored and regulated by
hormonal feedback mechanisms involving the hypothalamus, JGA and
to a certain extent, the heart.
Osmoreceptors in the body are activated by changes in blood volume,
body fluid volume and ionic concentration. An excessive loss of fluid from
the body can activate these receptors which stimulate the hypothalamus
to release antidiuretic hormone (ADH) or vasopressin from the
neurohypophysis. ADH facilitates water reabsorption from latter parts of
the tubule, thereby preventing diuresis. An increase in body fluid volume
can switch off the osmoreceptors and suppress the ADH release to complete
the feedback. ADH can also affect the kidney function by its constrictory
effects on blood vessels. This causes an increase in blood pressure. An
increase in blood pressure can increase the glomerular blood flow and
thereby the GFR.
The JGA plays a complex regulatory role. A fall in glomerular blood
flow/glomerular blood pressure/GFR can activate the JG cells to release
renin which converts angiotensinogen in blood to angiotensin I and
further to angiotensin II. Angiotensin II, being a powerful
vasoconstrictor, increases the glomerular blood pressure and thereby
GFR. Angiotensin II also activates the adrenal cortex to release
Aldosterone. Aldosterone causes reabsorption of Na+ and water from
the distal parts of the tubule. This also leads to an increase in blood
pressure and GFR. This complex mechanism is generally known as
the Renin-Angiotensin mechanism.
An increase in blood flow to the atria of the heart can cause the release
of Atrial Natriuretic Factor (ANF). ANF can cause vasodilation (dilation of
blood vessels) and thereby decrease the blood pressure. ANF mechanism,
therefore, acts as a check on the renin-angiotensin mechanism.
16.6
MICTURITION
Urine formed by the nephrons is ultimately carried to the urinary bladder
where it is stored till a voluntary signal is given by the central nervous
system (CNS). This signal is initiated by the stretching of the urinary bladder
as it gets filled with urine. In response, the stretch receptors on the walls
of the bladder send signals to the CNS. The CNS passes on motor messages
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 16 - Page 9 :
 EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION
213
to initiate the contraction of smooth muscles of the bladder and
simultaneous relaxation of the urethral sphincter causing the release of
urine. The process of release of urine is called micturition and the neural
mechanisms causing it is called the micturition reflex. An adult human
excretes, on an average, 1 to 1.5 litres of urine per day. The urine formed
is a light yellow coloured watery fluid which is slightly acidic (pH-6.0)
and has a characterestic odour. On an average, 25-30 gm of urea is
excreted out per day. Various conditions can affect the characteristics of
urine. Analysis of urine helps in clinical diagnosis of many metabolic
discorders as well as malfunctioning of the kidney. For example, presence
of glucose (Glycosuria) and ketone bodies (Ketonuria) in urine are
indicative of diabetes mellitus.
16.7
ROLE OF OTHER ORGANS IN EXCRETION
Other than the kidneys, lungs, liver and skin also help in the elimination
of excretory wastes.
Our lungs remove large amounts of CO2 (approximately 200mL/
minute) and also significant quantities of water every day. Liver, the largest
gland in our body, secretes bile-containing substances like bilirubin,
biliverdin, cholesterol, degraded steroid hormones, vitamins and drugs.
Most of these substances ultimately pass out alongwith digestive wastes.
The sweat and sebaceous glands in the skin can eliminate certain
substances through their secretions. Sweat produced by the sweat
glands is a watery fluid containing NaCl, small amounts of urea, lactic
acid, etc. Though the primary function of sweat is to facilitate a cooling
effect on the body surface, it also helps in the removal of some of the
wastes mentioned above. Sebaceous glands eliminate certain
substances like sterols, hydrocarbons and waxes through sebum. This
secretion provides a protective oily covering for the skin. Do you know
that small amounts of nitrogenous wastes could be eliminated through
saliva too?
16.8
DISORDERS OF THE EXCRETORY SYSTEM
Malfunctioning of kidneys can lead to accumulation of urea in blood, a
condition called uremia, which is highly harmful and may lead to kidney
failure. In such patients, urea can be removed by a process called
hemodialysis. During the process of haemodialysis, the blood drained
from a convenient artery is pumped into a dialysing unit called artificial
kidney. Blood drained from a convenient artery is pumped into a dialysing
unit after adding an anticoagulant like heparin. The unit contains a coiled
cellophane tube surrounded by a fluid (dialysing fluid) having the same
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 16 - Page 10 :
 214
BIOLOGY
SUMMARY
Many nitrogen containing substances, ions, CO2, water, etc., that accumulate in
the body have to be eliminated. Nature of nitrogenous wastes formed and their
excretion vary among animals, mainly depending on the habitat (availability of
water). Ammonia, urea and uric acid are the major nitrogenous wastes excreted.
Protonephridia, nephridia, malpighian tubules, green glands and the kidneys are
the common excretory organs in animals. They not only eliminate nitrogenous wastes
but also help in the maintenance of ionic and acid-base balance of body fluids.
In humans, the excretory system consists of one pair of kidneys, a pair of ureters,
a urinary bladder and a urethra. Each kidney has over a million tubular structures
called nephrons. Nephron is the functional unit of kidney and has two portions –
glomerulus and renal tubule. Glomerulus is a tuft of capillaries formed from afferent
arterioles, fine branches of renal artery. The renal tubule starts with a double walled
Bowman’s capsule and is further differentiated into a proximal convoluted tubule
(PCT), Henle’s loop (HL) and distal convoluted tubule (DCT). The DCTs of many
nephrons join to a common collecting duct many of which ultimately open into the
renal pelvis through the medullary pyramids. The Bowman’s capsule encloses the
glomerulus to form Malpighian or renal corpuscle.
Urine formation involves three main processes, i.e., filtration, reabsorption and
secretion. Filtration is a non-selective process performed by the glomerulus using
the glomerular capillary blood pressure. About 1200 ml of blood is filtered by the
glomerulus per minute to form 125 ml of filtrate in the Bowman’s capsule per
composition as that of plasma except the nitrogenous wastes. The porous
cellophane membrance of the tube allows the passage of molecules based
on concentration gradient. As nitrogenous wastes are absent in the
dialysing fluid, these substances freely move out, thereby clearing the
blood. The cleared blood is pumped back to the body through a vein
after adding anti-heparin to it. This method is a boon for thousands of
uremic patients all over the world.
Kidney transplantation is the ultimate method in the correction of
acute renal failures (kidney failure). A functioning kidney is used in
transplantation from a donor, preferably a close relative, to minimise its
chances of rejection by the immune system of the host. Modern clinical
procedures have increased the success rate of such a complicated
technique.
Renal calculi: Stone or insoluble mass of crystallised salts (oxalates,
etc.) formed within the kidney.
Glomerulonephritis: Inflammation of glomeruli of kidney.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 16 - Page 11 :
 EXCRETORY PRODUCTS AND THEIR ELIMINATION
215
minute (GFR). JGA, a specialised portion of the nephrons, plays a significant role
in the regulation of GFR. Nearly 99 per cent reabsorption of the filtrate takes place
through different parts of the nephrons. PCT is the major site of reabsorption and
selective secretion. HL primarily helps to maintain osmolar gradient
(300 mOsmolL–1 -1200 mOsmolL–1) within the kidney interstitium. DCT and
collecting duct allow extensive reabsorption of water and certain electrolytes, which
help in osmoregulation: H+, K+ and NH3 could be secreted into the filtrate by the
tubules to maintain the ionic balance and pH of body fluids.
A counter current mechanism operates between the two limbs of the loop of
Henle and those of vasa recta (capillary parallel to Henle’s loop). The filtrate gets
concentrated as it moves down the descending limb but is diluted by the ascending
limb. Electrolytes and urea are retained in the interstitium by this arrangement.
DCT and collecting duct concentrate the filtrate about four times, i.e., from 300
mOsmolL–1 to 1200 mOsmolL–1, an excellent mechanism of conservation of water.
Urine is stored in the urinary bladder till a voluntary signal from CNS carries out
its release through urethra, i.e., micturition. Skin, lungs and liver also assist in
excretion.
EXERCISES
1. Define Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR)
2. Explain the autoregulatory mechanism of GFR.
3. Indicate whether the following statements are true or false :
(a) Micturition is carried out by a reflex.
(b) ADH helps in water elimination, making the urine hypotonic.
(c) Protein-free fluid is filtered from blood plasma into the Bowman’s capsule.
(d) Henle’s loop plays an important role in concentrating the urine.
(e) Glucose is actively reabsorbed in the proximal convoluted tubule.
4. Give a brief account of the counter current mechanism.
5. Describe the role of liver, lungs and skin in excretion.
6. Explain micturition.
7. Match the items of column I with those of column II :
Column I
Column II
(a) Ammonotelism
(i) Birds
(b) Bowman’s capsule
(ii) Water reabsorption
(c) Micturition
(iii) Bony fish
(d) Uricotelism
(iv) Urinary bladder
(d) ADH
(v) Renal tubule
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 16 - Page 12 :
 216
BIOLOGY
8. What is meant by the term osmoregulation?
9. Terrestrial animals are generally either ureotelic or uricotelic, not ammonotelic,
why ?
10. What is the significance of juxta glomerular apparatus (JGA) in kidney function?
11. Name the following:
(a) A chordate animal having flame cells as excretory structures
(b) Cortical portions projecting between the medullary  pyramids in the human
kidney
(c) A loop of capillary running parallel to the Henle’s loop.
12. Fill in the gaps :
(a) Ascending limb of Henle’s loop is _______ to water whereas the descending
limb is _______  to it.
(b) Reabsorption of water from distal parts of the tubules is facilitated by hormone
_______.
(c) Dialysis fluid contain all the constituents as in plasma except _______.
(d) A healthy adult human excretes (on an average) _______ gm of urea/day.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 17 - Page 1 :
 LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT
217
Movement is one of the  significant features of living beings. Animals and
plants exhibit a wide range of movements. Streaming of protoplasm in
the unicellular organisms like Amoeba is a simple form of movement.
Movement of cilia, flagella and tentacles are shown by many organisms.
Human beings can move limbs, jaws, eyelids, tongue, etc. Some of the
movements result in a change of place or location. Such voluntary
movements are called locomotion. Walking, running, climbing, flying,
swimming are all some forms of locomotory movements. Locomotory
structures need not be different from those affecting other types of
movements. For example, in Paramoecium, cilia helps in the movement of
food through cytopharynx and in locomotion as well. Hydra can use its
tentacles for capturing its prey and also use them for locomotion. We use
limbs for changes in body postures and locomotion as well. The above
observations suggest that movements and locomotion cannot be studied
separately. The two may be linked by stating that all locomotions are
movements but all movements are not locomotions.
Methods of locomotion performed by animals vary with their habitats
and the demand of the situation. However, locomotion is generally for
search of food, shelter, mate, suitable breeding grounds, favourable
climatic conditions or to escape from enemies/predators.
17.1
TYPES OF MOVEMENT
Cells of the human body exhibit three main types of movements, namely,
amoeboid, ciliary and muscular.
LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT
CHAPTER  17
17.1 Types of
Movement
17.2 Muscle
17.3 Skeletal
System
17.4 Joints
17.5 Disorders of
Muscular and
Skeletal System
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 17 - Page 2 :
 218
BIOLOGY
Some specialised cells in our body like macrophages and leucocytes
in blood exhibit amoeboid movement. It is effected by pseudopodia formed
by the streaming of protoplasm (as in Amoeba). Cytoskeletal elements
like microfilaments are also involved in amoeboid movement.
Ciliary movement occurs in most of our internal tubular organs which
are lined by  ciliated epithelium. The coordinated movements of cilia in
the trachea help us in removing dust particles and some of the foreign
substances inhaled alongwith the atmospheric air. Passage of ova through
the female reproductive tract is also facilitated by the ciliary movement.
Movement of our limbs, jaws, tongue, etc, require muscular movement.
The contractile property of muscles are effectively used for locomotion
and other movements by human beings and majority of multicellular
organisms. Locomotion requires a perfect coordinated activity of muscular,
skeletal and neural systems. In this chapter, you will learn about the
types of muscles, their structure, mechanism of their contraction and
important aspects of the skeletal system.
17.2
MUSCLE
You have studied in Chapter 8 that the cilia and flagella are the outgrowths
of the cell membrane. Flagellar movement helps in the swimming of
spermatozoa, maintenance of water current in the canal system of sponges
and in locomotion of Protozoans like Euglena. Muscle is a specialised
tissue of mesodermal origin. About 40-50 per cent of the body
weight of a human adult is contributed by muscles. They have
special properties like excitability, contractility, extensibility and
elasticity. Muscles have been classified using different criteria,
namely location, appearance and nature of regulation of their
activities. Based on their location, three types of muscles are
identified : (i) Skeletal (ii) Visceral and (iii) Cardiac.
Skeletal muscles are closely associated with the skeletal components
of the body. They have a striped appearance under the microscope and
hence are called striated muscles. As their activities are under the
voluntary control of the nervous system, they are known as voluntary
muscles too. They are primarily involved in locomotory actions and
changes of body postures.
Visceral muscles are located in the inner walls of hollow visceral organs
of the body like the alimentary canal, reproductive tract, etc. They do not
exhibit any striation and are smooth in appearance. Hence, they are called
smooth muscles (nonstriated muscle). Their activities are not under the
voluntary control of the nervous system and are therefore known as
involuntary muscles. They assist, for example, in the transportation of food
through the digestive tract and gametes through the genital tract.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 17 - Page 3 :
 LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT
219
muscle fibre is lined by the plasma membrane called sarcolemma
enclosing the sarcoplasm. Muscle fibre is a syncitium as the sarcoplasm
contains many nuclei. The endoplasmic reticulum, i.e., sarcoplasmic
reticulum of the muscle fibres is the store house of calcium ions. A
characteristic feature of the muscle fibre is the presence of a large number
of parallelly arranged filaments in the sarcoplasm called myofilaments or
myofibrils. Each myofibril has alternate dark and light bands on it. A
detailed study of the myofibril has established that the striated appearance
is due to the distribution pattern of two important proteins – Actin and
Myosin. The light bands contain actin and is called I-band or Isotropic
band, whereas the dark band called ‘A’ or Anisotropic band contains
As the name suggests, Cardiac muscles are the muscles of heart.
Many cardiac muscle cells assemble in a branching pattern to form a
cardiac muscle. Based on appearance, cardiac muscles are striated. They
are involuntary in nature as the nervous system does not control their
activities directly.
Let us examine a skeletal muscle in detail to understand the structure
and mechanism of contraction. Each organised skeletal muscle in our
body is made of a number of muscle bundles or fascicles held together
by a common collagenous connective tissue layer called fascia. Each
muscle bundle  contains a number of muscle fibres (Figure 17.1). Each
Fascicle
(muscle bundle)
Muscle fibre
(muscle cell)
Sarcolemma
Blood capillary
Figure 17.1 Diagrammatic cross sectional view of a muscle showing muscle bundles
and muscle fibres
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 17 - Page 4 :
 220
BIOLOGY
myosin. Both the proteins are arranged as rod-like structures, parallel to
each other and also to the longitudinal axis of the myofibrils. Actin
filaments are thinner as compared to the myosin filaments, hence are
commonly called thin and thick filaments respectively. In the centre of
each ‘I’ band is an elastic fibre called ‘Z’ line which bisects it. The thin
filaments are firmly attached to the ‘Z’ line. The thick filaments in the
‘A’ band are also held together in the middle of this band by a thin fibrous
membrane called ‘M’ line. The ‘A’ and ‘I’ bands are arranged alternately
throughout the length of the myofibrils. The portion of the myofibril
between two successive ‘Z’ lines is considered as the functional unit of
contraction and is called a sarcomere (Figure 17.2). In a resting state, the
edges of thin filaments on either side of the thick filaments partially overlap
the free ends of the thick filaments leaving the central part of the thick
filaments. This central part of thick filament, not overlapped by thin
filaments is called the ‘H’ zone.
Figure 17.2 Diagrammatic representation of (a) anatomy of a muscle fibre showing
a sarcomere (b) a sarcomere
(a)
(b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 17 - Page 5 :
 LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT
221
17.2.1 Structure of Contractile Proteins
Each actin (thin) filament is made of two ‘F’ (filamentous) actins
helically wound to each other. Each ‘F’ actin is a polymer of monomeric
‘G’ (Globular) actins. Two filaments of another protein, tropomyosin
also run close to the ‘F’ actins throughout its length. A complex protein
Troponin is distributed at regular intervals on the tropomyosin. In the
resting state a subunit of troponin masks the active binding sites for
myosin on the actin filaments (Figure 17.3a).
Each myosin (thick) filament is also a polymerised protein. Many
monomeric proteins called Meromyosins (Figure 17.3b) constitute one
thick filament. Each meromyosin has two important parts, a globular
head with a short arm and a tail, the former being called the heavy
meromyosin (HMM) and the latter, the light meromyosin (LMM). The HMM
component, i.e.; the head and short arm projects outwards at regular
distance and angle from each other from the surface of a polymerised myosin
filament and is known as cross arm. The globular head is an active ATPase
enzyme and has binding sites for ATP and active sites for actin.
Figure 17.3 (a) An actin (thin) filament (b) Myosin monomer (Meromyosin)
Actin binding sites
ATP binding sites
Head
Cross arm
(a)
(b)
17.2.2 Mechanism of Muscle Contraction
Mechanism of muscle contraction is best explained by the sliding filament
theory which states that contraction of a muscle fibre takes place by the
sliding of the thin filaments over the thick filaments.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 17 - Page 6 :
 222
BIOLOGY
Muscle contraction is initiated by a signal sent by the central nervous
system (CNS) via a motor neuron. A motor neuron alongwith the muscle
fibres connected to it constitute a motor unit. The junction between a
motor neuron and the sarcolemma of the muscle fibre is called the
neuromuscular junction or motor-end plate. A neural signal reaching
this junction releases a neurotransmitter (Acetyl choline) which generates
an action potential in the sarcolemma. This spreads through the muscle
fibre and causes the release of calcium ions into the sarcoplasm. Increase
in Ca++ level leads to the binding of calcium with a subunit of troponin on
actin filaments and thereby remove the masking of active sites for myosin.
Utilising the energy from ATP hydrolysis, the myosin head now binds to
the exposed active sites on actin to form a cross bridge (Figure 17.4).
This pulls the attached actin filaments towards the centre of ‘A’ band.
The ‘Z’ line attached to these actins are also pulled inwards thereby causing
a shortening of the sarcomere, i.e., contraction. It is clear from the above
steps, that during shortening of the muscle, i.e., contraction, the ‘I’ bands
get reduced, whereas the ‘A’ bands retain the length (Figure 17.5). The
myosin, releasing the ADP and P1 goes back to its relaxed state. A new
ATP binds and the cross-bridge is broken (Figure 17.4). The ATP is again
hydrolysed by the myosin head and the cycle of cross bridge formation
Figure 17.4 Stages in cross bridge formation, rotation of head and breaking of
cross bridge
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 17 - Page 7 :
 LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT
223
and breakage is repeated causing further sliding. The process continues
till the Ca++ ions are pumped back to the sarcoplasmic cisternae resulting
in the masking of actin filaments. This causes the return of ‘Z’ lines back
to their original position, i.e., relaxation. The reaction time of the fibres
can vary in different muscles. Repeated activation of the muscles can lead
to the accumulation of lactic acid due to anaerobic breakdown of glycogen
in them, causing fatigue. Muscle contains a red coloured oxygen storing
pigment called myoglobin. Myoglobin content is high in some of the
muscles which gives a reddish appearance. Such muscles are called the
Red fibres. These muscles also contain plenty of mitochondria which can
utilise the large amount of oxygen stored in them for ATP production.
These muscles, therefore, can also be called aerobic muscles. On the
other hand, some of the muscles possess very less quantity of myoglobin
and therefore, appear pale or whitish. These are the White fibres. Number
of mitochondria are also few in them, but the amount of sarcoplasmic
reticulum is high. They depend on anaerobic process for energy.
Figure 17.5 Sliding-filament theory of muscle contraction (movement of the thin
filaments and the relative size of the I band and H zones)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 17 - Page 8 :
 224
BIOLOGY
17.3
SKELETAL SYSTEM
Skeletal system consists of a framework of bones and a few cartilages.
This system has a significant role in movement shown by the body.
Imagine chewing food without  jaw bones and walking around without
the limb bones. Bone and cartilage are specialised connective tissues.
The former has a very hard matrix due to calcium salts in it and the latter
has slightly pliable matrix due to chondroitin salts. In human beings,
this system is made up of 206 bones and a few cartilages. It is grouped
into two principal divisions – the axial and the appendicular skeleton.
Axial skeleton comprises 80 bones distributed along the main axis
of the body. The skull, vertebral column, sternum and ribs constitute
axial skeleton. The skull (Figure 17.6) is composed of two sets of bones –
cranial and facial, that totals to 22 bones. Cranial bones are 8 in number.
They form the hard protective outer covering, cranium for the brain. The
facial region is made up of 14 skeletal elements which form the front part
of the skull. A single U-shaped bone called hyoid is present at the base of
the buccal cavity and it is also included in the skull. Each middle ear
contains three tiny bones – Malleus, Incus and Stapes, collectively called
Ear Ossicles. The skull region articulates with the superior region of the
Parietal
bone
Frontal bone
Temporal
bone
Occipital
bone
Occipital
condyle
Sphenoid bone
Ethmoid bone
Lacrimal bone
Nasal bone
Zygomatic bone
Maxilla
Mandible
Hyoid bone
Figure 17.6 Diagrammatic view of human skull
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 17 - Page 9 :
 LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT
225
vertebral column with the help of two occipital
condyles (dicondylic skull).
Our vertebral column (Figure 17.7) is
formed by 26 serially arranged units called
vertebrae and is dorsally placed. It extends from
the base of the skull and constitutes the main
framework of the trunk. Each vertebra has a
central hollow portion (neural canal) through
which the spinal cord passes. First vertebra is
the atlas and it articulates with the occipital
condyles. The vertebral column is differentiated
into cervical (7), thoracic (12), lumbar (5), sacral
(1-fused) and coccygeal (1-fused) regions
starting from the skull. The number of cervical
vertebrae are seven in almost all mammals
including human beings. The vertebral column
protects the spinal cord, supports the head and
serves as the point of attachment for the ribs
and musculature of the back. Sternum is a
flat bone on the ventral midline of thorax.
There are 12 pairs of ribs. Each rib is a
thin flat bone connected dorsally to the
vertebral column and ventrally to the sternum.
It has two articulation surfaces on its dorsal
end and is hence called bicephalic. First
seven pairs of ribs are called true ribs.
Dorsally, they are attached to the thoracic
vertebrae and ventrally connected to the
sternum with the help of hyaline cartilage.
The 8th, 9th and 10th pairs of ribs do not
articulate directly with the sternum but join
the seventh rib with the help of hyaline
cartilage. These are called vertebrochondral
(false) ribs. Last 2 pairs (11th and 12th) of ribs
are not connected ventrally and are therefore,
called floating ribs. Thoracic vertebrae, ribs
and sternum together form the rib cage
(Figure 17.8).
The bones of the limbs alongwith their
girdles constitute the appendicular
skeleton. Each limb is made of 30 bones.
The bones of the hand (fore limb) are
Cervical vertebra
Intervertebral
disc
Sacrum
Coccyx
Thoracic
vertebra
Lumbar
vertebra
Figure 17.7  Vertebral column (right lateral view)
Figure 17.8  Ribs and rib cage
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 17 - Page 10 :
 226
BIOLOGY
Figure 17.9 Right pectoral girdle and upper
arm. (frontal view)
humerus, radius and ulna, carpals (wrist bones
– 8 in number), metacarpals (palm bones – 5
in number) and phalanges (digits – 14 in
number) (Figure 17.9). Femur (thigh bone –
the longest bone), tibia and fibula, tarsals (ankle
bones – 7 in number), metatarsals (5 in
number) and phalanges (digits – 14 in number)
are the bones of the legs (hind limb) (Figure
17.10). A cup shaped bone called patella cover
the knee ventrally (knee cap).
Pectoral and Pelvic girdle bones help in
the articulation of the upper and the lower limbs
respectively with the axial skeleton. Each
girdle is formed of two halves. Each half of
pectoral girdle consists of a clavicle and a
scapula (Figure 17.9). Scapula is a large
triangular flat bone situated in the dorsal part
of the thorax between the second and the
seventh ribs. The dorsal, flat, triangular body
of scapula has a slightly elevated ridge called
the spine which projects as a flat, expanded
process called the acromion. The clavicle
articulates with this. Below the acromion is a
depression called the glenoid cavity which
articulates with the head of the humerus to
form the shoulder joint. Each clavicle is a long
slender bone with two curvatures. This bone
is commonly called the collar bone.
Pelvic girdle consists of two coxal bones
(Figure 17.10). Each coxal bone is formed by
the fusion of three bones – ilium, ischium and
pubis. At the point of fusion of the above bones
is a cavity called acetabulum to which the thigh
bone articulates. The two halves of the pelvic
girdle meet ventrally to form the pubic
symphysis containing fibrous cartilage.
17.4
JOINTS
Joints are essential for all types of movements
involving the bony parts of the body.
Locomotory movements are no exception to
Figure 17.10 Right pelvic girdle and lower limb
bones (frontal view)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 17 - Page 11 :
 LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT
227
this. Joints are points of contact between bones, or between bones and
cartilages. Force generated by the muscles is used to carry out movement
through joints, where the joint acts as a fulcrum. The movability at these
joints vary depending on different factors. Joints have been classified into
three major structural forms, namely, fibrous, cartilaginous and synovial.
Fibrous joints do not allow any movement. This type of joint is shown
by the flat skull bones which fuse end-to-end with the help of dense fibrous
connective tissues in the form of sutures, to form the cranium.
In cartilaginous joints, the bones involved are joined together with
the help of cartilages. The joint between the adjacent vertebrae in the
vertebral column is of this pattern and it permits limited movements.
Synovial joints are characterised by the presence of a fluid filled synovial
cavity between the articulating surfaces of the two bones. Such an arragement
allows considerable movement. These joints help in locomotion and many
other movements. Ball and socket joint (between humerus and pectoral
girdle), hinge joint (knee joint), pivot joint (between atlas and axis), gliding
joint (between the carpals) and saddle joint (between carpal and metacarpal
of thumb) are some examples.
17.5
DISORDERS OF MUSCULAR AND SKELETAL SYSTEM
Myasthenia gravis: Auto immune disorder affecting neuromuscular
junction leading to fatigue, weakening and paralysis of skeletal muscle.
Muscular dystrophy: Progressive degeneration of skeletal muscle mostly
due to genetic disorder.
Tetany: Rapid spasms (wild contractions) in muscle due to low Ca++ in
body fluid.
Arthritis: Inflammation of joints.
Osteoporosis: Age-related disorder characterised by decreased bone mass
and increased chances of fractures. Decreased levels of estrogen is a
common cause.
Gout: Inflammation of joints due to accumulation of uric acid crystals.
SUMMARY
Movement is an essential feature of all living beings. Protoplasmic streaming, ciliary
movements, movements of fins, limbs, wings, etc., are some forms exhibited by
animals. A voluntary movement which causes the animal to change its place, is
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 17 - Page 12 :
 228
BIOLOGY
called locomotion. Animals move generally in search of food, shelter, mate, breeding
ground, better climate or to protect themselves.
The cells of the human body exhibit amoeboid, ciliary and muscular
movements. Locomotion and many other movements require coordinated muscular
activities. Three types of muscles are present in our body. Skeletal muscles are
attached to skeletal elements. They appear striated and are voluntary in nature.
Visceral muscles, present in the inner walls of visceral organs are nonstriated and
involuntary. Cardiac muscles are the muscles of the heart. They are striated,
branched and involuntary. Muscles possess excitability, contractility, extensibility
and elasticity.
Muscle fibre is the anatomical unit of muscle. Each muscle fibre has many
parallelly arranged myofibrils. Each myofibril contains many serially arranged
units called sarcomere which are the functional units. Each sarcomere has a central
‘A’ band made of thick myosin filaments, and two half ‘I’ bands made of thin actin
filaments on either side of it marked by ‘Z’  lines. Actin and myosin are polymerised
proteins with contractility. The active sites for myosin on resting actin filament are
masked by a protein-troponin. Myosin head contains ATPase and has ATP binding
sites and active sites for actin. A motor neuron carries signal to the muscle fibre
which generates an action potential in it. This causes the release of Ca++ from
sarcoplasmic reticulum. Ca++ activates actin which binds to the myosin head to
form a cross bridge. These cross bridges pull the actin filaments causing them to
slide over the myosin filaments and thereby causing contraction. Ca++ are then
returned to sarcoplasmic reticulum which inactivate the actin. Cross bridges are
broken and the muscles relax.
Repeated stimulation of muscles leads to fatigue. Muscles are classified as
Red and White fibres based primarily on the amount of red coloured myoglobin
pigment in them.
Bones and cartilages constitute our skeletal system. The skeletal system is
divisible into axial and appendicular. Skull, vertebral column, ribs and sternum
constitute the axial skeleton. Limb bones and girdles form the appendicular
skeleton. Three types of joints are formed between bones or between bone and
cartilage – fibrous, cartilaginous and synovial. Synovial joints allow considerable
movements and therefore, play a significant role in locomotion.
EXERCISES
1. Draw the diagram of a sarcomere of skeletal muscle showing different regions.
2. Define sliding filament theory of muscle contraction.
3. Describe the important steps in muscle contraction.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 17 - Page 13 :
 LOCOMOTION AND MOVEMENT
229
4. Write true or false. If false change the statement so that it is true.
(a) Actin is present in thin filament
(b) H-zone of striated muscle fibre represents both thick and thin filaments.
(c) Human skeleton has 206 bones.
(d) There are 11 pairs of ribs in man.
(e) Sternum is present on the ventral side of the body.
5. Write the difference between :
(a) Actin and Myosin
(b) Red and White muscles
(c) Pectoral and Pelvic girdle
6. Match Column I with Column II :
Column I
Column II
(a) Smooth muscle
(i) Myoglobin
(b) Tropomyosin
(ii) Thin filament
(c) Red muscle
(iii) Sutures
(d) Skull
(iv) Involuntary
7. What are the different types of movements exhibited by the cells of human
body?
8. How do you distinguish between a skeletal muscle and a cardiac muscle?
9. Name the type of joint between the following:-
(a) atlas/axis
(b) carpal/metacarpal of thumb
(c) between phalanges
(d) femur/acetabulum
(e) between cranial bones
(f) between pubic bones in the pelvic girdle
10. Fill in the blank spaces:
(a) All mammals (except a few) have __________ cervical vertebra.
(b) The number of phalanges in each limb of human is __________
(c) Thin filament of myofibril contains 2 ‘F’ actins and two other proteins namely
__________ and __________.
(d) In a muscle fibre Ca++ is stored in __________
(e) __________ and __________ pairs of ribs are called floating ribs.
(f)
The human cranium is made of __________ bones.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 18 - Page 1 :
 230
BIOLOGY
As you know, the functions of the organs/organ systems in our body
must be coordinated to maintain homeostasis. Coordination is the
process through which two or more organs interact and complement the
functions of one another. For example, when we do physical exercises,
the energy demand is increased for maintaining an increased muscular
activity. The supply of oxygen is also increased. The increased supply of
oxygen necessitates an increase in the rate of respiration, heart beat and
increased blood flow via blood vessels. When physical exercise is stopped,
the activities of nerves, lungs, heart and kidney gradually return to their
normal conditions. Thus, the functions of muscles, lungs, heart, blood
vessels, kidney and other organs are coordinated while performing physical
exercises. In our body the neural system and the endocrine system jointly
coordinate and integrate all the activities of the organs so that they function
in a synchronised fashion.
The neural system provides an organised network of point-to-point
connections for a quick coordination. The endocrine system provides
chemical integration through hormones. In this chapter, you will learn
about the neural system of human, mechanisms of neural coordination
like transmission of nerve impulse, impulse conduction across a synapse.
NEURAL CONTROL AND
COORDINATION
CHAPTER  18
18.1 Neural System
18.2 Human Neural
System
18.3 Neuron as
Structural and
Functional Unit
of Neural
System
18.4  Central Neural
System
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 18 - Page 2 :
 NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION
231
18.1
NEURAL SYSTEM
The neural system of all animals is composed of highly specialised cells called
neurons which can detect, receive and transmit different kinds of stimuli.
The neural organisation is very simple in lower invertebrates. For
example, in Hydra it is composed of a network of neurons. The neural
system is better organised in insects, where a brain is present along with
a number of ganglia and neural tissues. The vertebrates have a more
developed neural system.
18.2
HUMAN NEURAL SYSTEM
The human neural system is divided into two parts :
(i) the central neural system (CNS)
(ii) the peripheral neural system (PNS)
The CNS includes the brain and the spinal cord and is the site of
information processing and control. The PNS comprises of all the nerves
of the body associated with the CNS (brain and spinal cord). The nerve
fibres of the PNS are of two types :
(a) afferent fibres
(b) efferent fibres
The afferent nerve fibres transmit impulses from tissues/organs to
the CNS and the efferent fibres transmit regulatory impulses from the
CNS to the concerned peripheral tissues/organs.
The PNS is divided into two divisions called somatic neural system
and autonomic neural system. The somatic neural system relays
impulses from the CNS to skeletal muscles while the autonomic neural
system transmits impulses from the CNS to the involuntary organs and
smooth muscles of the body. The autonomic neural system is further
classified into sympathetic neural system and parasympathetic neural
system.
       Visceral nervous system is the part of the peripheral nervous system
that comprises the whole complex of nerves, fibres, ganglia, and plexuses
by which impulses travel from the central nervous system to the viscera
and from the viscera to the central nervous system.
18.3
NEURON AS STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL UNIT OF
NEURAL SYSTEM
A neuron is a microscopic structure composed of three major parts, namely,
cell body, dendrites and axon (Figure 18.1). The cell body contains cytoplasm
with typical cell organelles and certain granular bodies called Nissl’s granules.
Short fibres which branch repeatedly and project out of the cell body also
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 18 - Page 3 :
 232
BIOLOGY
contain Nissl’s granules and are called dendrites. These
fibres transmit impulses towards the cell body.   The
axon is a long fibre, the distal end of which is branched.
Each branch terminates as a bulb-like structure called
synaptic knob which possess synaptic vesicles
containing chemicals called neurotransmitters. The
axons transmit nerve impulses away from the cell body
to a synapse or to a neuro-muscular junction. Based
on the number of axon and dendrites, the neurons are
divided into three types, i.e., multipolar (with one axon
and two or more dendrites; found in the cerebral cortex),
bipolar (with one axon and one dendrite, found in the
retina of eye) and unipolar (cell body with one axon
only; found usually in the embryonic stage). There are
two types of axons, namely, myelinated and non-
myelinated. The myelinated nerve fibres are enveloped
with Schwann cells, which form a myelin sheath
around the axon. The gaps between two adjacent
myelin sheaths are called nodes of Ranvier.
Myelinated nerve fibres are found in spinal and cranial
nerves. Unmyelinated nerve fibre is enclosed by a
Schwann cell that does not form a myelin sheath
around the axon, and is commonly found in
autonomous and the somatic neural systems.
18.3.1
Generation and Conduction of
Nerve Impulse
Neurons are excitable cells because their membranes are in a polarised
state. Do you know why the membrane of a neuron is polarised? Different
types of ion channels are present on the neural membrane. These ion
channels are selectively permeable to different ions. When a neuron is not
conducting any impulse, i.e., resting, the axonal membrane is
comparatively more permeable to potassium ions (K
+) and nearly
impermeable to sodium ions (Na+). Similarly, the membrane is
impermeable to negatively charged proteins present in the axoplasm.
Consequently, the axoplasm inside the axon contains high concentration
of K+ and negatively charged proteins and low concentration of Na+. In
contrast, the fluid outside the axon contains a low concentration of K+, a
high concentration of Na+ and thus form a concentration gradient. These
ionic gradients across the resting membrane are maintained by the active
transport of ions by the sodium-potassium pump which transports 3
Na
+ outwards for 2 K
+ into the cell. As a result, the outer surface of the
axonal membrane possesses a positive charge while its inner surface
Figure 18.1 Structure of a neuron
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 18 - Page 4 :
 NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION
233
becomes negatively charged and therefore is polarised. The electrical
potential difference across the resting plasma membrane is called as the
resting potential.
You might be curious to know about the mechanisms of generation
of nerve impulse and its conduction along an axon. When a stimulus is
applied at a site (Figure 18.2 e.g., point A) on the polarised membrane,
the membrane at the site A becomes freely permeable to Na+. This leads
to a rapid influx of Na+ followed by the reversal of the polarity at that site,
i.e., the outer surface of the membrane becomes negatively charged and
the inner side becomes positively charged. The polarity of the membrane
at the site A is thus reversed and hence depolarised. The electrical potential
difference across the plasma membrane at the site A is called the
action potential, which is in fact termed as a nerve impulse. At sites
immediately ahead, the axon (e.g., site B) membrane has a positive charge
on the outer surface and a negative charge on its inner surface. As a
result, a current flows on the inner surface from site A to site B. On the
outer surface current flows from site B to site A (Figure 18.2) to complete
the circuit of current flow. Hence, the polarity at the site is reversed, and
an action potential is generated at site B.  Thus, the impulse (action
potential) generated at site A arrives at site B. The sequence is repeated
along the length of the axon and consequently the impulse is conducted.
The rise in the stimulus-induced permeability to Na+ is extremely short-
lived. It is quickly followed by a rise in permeability to K+. Within a fraction
of a second, K+ diffuses outside the membrane and restores the resting
potential of the membrane at the site of excitation and the fibre becomes
once more responsive to further stimulation.
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
-
A
Na
B
Na
Figure 18.2 Diagrammatic representation of impulse conduction through an axon
(at points A and B)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 18 - Page 5 :
 234
BIOLOGY
18.3.2 Transmission of Impulses
A nerve impulse is transmitted from one neuron to another through
junctions called synapses. A synapse is formed by the membranes of a
pre-synaptic neuron and a post-synaptic neuron, which may or may not
be separated by a gap called synaptic cleft. There are two types of
synapses, namely, electrical synapses and chemical synapses. At electrical
synapses, the membranes of pre- and post-synaptic neurons are in very
close proximity. Electrical current can flow directly from one neuron into
the other across these synapses. Transmission of an impulse across
electrical synapses is very similar to impulse conduction along a single
axon. Impulse transmission across an electrical synapse is always faster
than that across a chemical synapse. Electrical synapses are rare in our
system.
At a chemical synapse, the membranes of the pre- and post-synaptic
neurons are separated by a fluid-filled space called synaptic cleft
(Figure 18.3). Do you know how the pre-synaptic neuron transmits an
impulse (action potential) across the synaptic cleft to the post-synaptic
neuron? Chemicals called neurotransmitters are involved in the
transmission of impulses at these synapses. The axon terminals contain
vesicles filled with these neurotransmitters. When an impulse (action
potential) arrives at the axon terminal, it stimulates the movement of the
synaptic vesicles towards the membrane where they fuse with the plasma
Figure 18.3 Diagram showing axon terminal and synapse
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 18 - Page 6 :
 NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION
235
membrane and release their neurotransmitters in the synaptic cleft. The
released neurotransmitters bind to their specific receptors, present on
the post-synaptic membrane. This binding opens ion channels allowing
the entry of ions which can generate a new potential in the post-synaptic
neuron. The new potential developed may be either excitatory or
inhibitory.
18.4
CENTRAL NEURAL SYSTEM
The brain is the central information processing organ of our body, and
acts as the ‘command and control system’. It controls the voluntary
movements, balance of the body, functioning of vital involuntary organs
(e.g., lungs, heart, kidneys, etc.), thermoregulation, hunger and thirst,
circadian (24-hour) rhythms of our body, activities of several endocrine
glands and human behaviour.  It is also the site for processing of vision,
hearing, speech, memory, intelligence, emotions and thoughts.
The human brain is well protected by the skull. Inside the skull, the
brain is covered by cranial meninges consisting of an outer layer called
dura mater, a very thin middle layer called arachnoid and an inner layer
(which is in contact with the brain tissue) called pia mater. The brain can
be divided into three major parts: (i) forebrain, (ii) midbrain, and
(iii) hindbrain (Figure 18.4).
Figure 18.4 Diagram showing sagital section of the human brain
Forebrain
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 18 - Page 7 :
 236
BIOLOGY
18.4.1 Forebrain
The forebrain consists of cerebrum, thalamus and hypothalamus
(Figure 18.4). Cerebrum forms the major part of the human brain. A deep
cleft divides the cerebrum longitudinally into two halves, which are termed
as the left and right cerebral hemispheres. The hemispheres are
connected by a tract of nerve fibres called corpus callosum. The layer of
cells which covers the cerebral hemisphere is called cerebral cortex and is
thrown into prominent folds. The cerebral cortex is referred to as the grey
matter due to its greyish appearance. The neuron cell bodies are
concentrated here giving the colour. The cerebral cortex contains motor
areas, sensory areas and large regions that are neither clearly sensory
nor motor in function. These regions called as the association areas are
responsible for complex functions like intersensory associations, memory
and communication. Fibres of the tracts are covered with the myelin sheath,
which constitute the inner part of cerebral hemisphere. They give an
opaque white appearance to the layer and, hence, is called the white matter.
The cerebrum wraps around a structure called thalamus, which is a major
coordinating centre for sensory and motor signaling. Another very
important part of the brain called hypothalamus lies at the base of the
thalamus. The hypothalamus contains a number of centres which control
body temperature, urge for eating and drinking. It also contains several
groups of neurosecretory cells, which secrete hormones called
hypothalamic hormones. The inner parts of cerebral hemispheres and a
group of associated deep structures like amygdala, hippocampus, etc.,
form a complex structure called the limbic lobe or limbic system. Along
with the hypothalamus, it is involved in the regulation of sexual behaviour,
expression of emotional reactions (e.g., excitement, pleasure, rage and
fear), and motivation.
18.4.2 Midbrain
The midbrain is located between the thalamus/hypothalamus of the
forebrain and pons of the hindbrain. A canal called the cerebral aqueduct
passess through the midbrain. The dorsal portion of the midbrain consists
mainly of four round swellings (lobes) called corpora quadrigemina.
18.4.3 Hindbrain
The hindbrain comprises pons, cerebellum and medulla (also called
the medulla oblongata). Pons consists of fibre tracts that interconnect
different regions of the brain. Cerebellum has very convoluted surface in
order to provide the additional space for many more neurons. The medulla
of the brain is connected to the spinal cord. The medulla contains centres
which control respiration, cardiovascular reflexes and gastric secretions.
Three major regions make up the brain stem; mid brain, pons
and medulla oblongata. Brain stem forms the connections between
the brain and spinal cord.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 18 - Page 8 :
 NEURAL CONTROL AND COORDINATION
237
SUMMARY
The neural system coordinates and integrates functions as well as metabolic
and homeostatic activities of all the organs. Neurons, the functional units of
neural system are excitable cells due to a differential concentration gradient of
ions across the membrane. The electrical potential difference across the resting
neural membrane is called the ‘resting potential’. The nerve impulse is conducted
along the axon membrane in the form of a wave of depolarisation and
repolarisation. A synapse is formed by the membranes of a pre-synaptic neuron
and a post-synaptic neuron which may or may not be separated by a gap called
synaptic cleft. Chemicals involved in the transmission of impulses at chemical
synapses are called neurotransmitters.
Human neural system consists of two parts : (i) central neural system (CNS)
and (ii) the peripheral neural system. The CNS consists of the brain and spiral
cord. The brain can be divided into three major parts : (i) forebrain, (ii) midbrain
and (iii) hindbrain. The forebrain consists of cerebrum, thalamus and
hypothalamus. The cerebrum is longitudinally divided into two halves that are
connected by the corpus callosum. A very important part of the forebrain called
hypothalamus controls the body temperature, eating and drinking. Inner parts
of cerebral hemispheres and a group of associated deep structures form a complex
structure called limbic system which is concerned with olfaction, autonomic
responses, regulation of sexual behaviour, expression of emotional reactions,
and motivation. The midbrain receives and integrates visual, tactile and auditory
inputs. The hindbrain comprises pons, cerebellum and medulla. The cerebellum
integrates information received from the semicircular canals of the ear and the
auditory system. The medulla contains centres, which control respiration,
cardiovascular reflexes, and gastric secretions. Pons consist of fibre tracts that
interconnect different regions of the brain.
EXERCISES
1. Briefly describe the structure of the Brain
2. Compare the following:
(a) Central neural system (CNS) and Peripheral neural system (PNS)
(b) Resting potential and action potential
3. Explain the following processes:
(a) Polarisation of the membrane of a nerve fibre
(b) Depolarisation of the membrane of a nerve fibre
(c) Transmission of a nerve impulse across a chemical synapse
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 18 - Page 9 :
 238
BIOLOGY
4. Draw labelled diagrams of the following:
(a) Neuron       (b) Brain
5.
Write short notes on the following:
(a) Neural coordination (b) Forebrain (c) Midbrain
(d) Hindbrain
(e) Synapse
6.
Give a brief account of Mechanism of synaptic transmission.
7.
Explain the role of Na+ in the generation of action potential.
8.
Differentiate between:
(a) Myelinated and non-myelinated axons
(b) Dendrites and axons
(c) Thalamus and Hypothalamus
(d) Cerebrum and Cerebellum
9.
Answer the following:
(a) Which part of the human brain is the most developed?
(b)  Which part of our central neural system acts as a master clock?
10. Distinguish between:
(a) afferent neurons and efferent neurons
(b) impulse conduction in a myelinated nerve fibre and unmyelinated nerve
fibre
(f) cranial nerves and spinal nerves.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 19 - Page 1 :
 239
239
CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION
You have already learnt that the neural system provides a
point-to-point rapid coordination among organs. The neural
coordination is fast but short-lived. As the nerve fibres do not innervate
all cells of the body and the cellular functions need to be continuously
regulated; a special kind of coordination and integration has to be
provided. This function is carried out by hormones. The neural system
and the endocrine system jointly coordinate and regulate the
physiological functions in the body.
19.1
ENDOCRINE GLANDS AND HORMONES
Endocrine glands lack ducts and are hence, called ductless glands. Their
secretions are called hormones. The classical definition of hormone as a
chemical produced by endocrine glands and released into the blood and
transported to a distantly located target organ has current scientific
definition as follows: Hormones are non-nutrient chemicals which
act as intercellular messengers and are produced in trace amounts.
The new definition covers a number of new molecules in addition to the
hormones secreted by the organised endocrine glands. Invertebrates
possess very simple endocrine systems with few hormones whereas a large
number of chemicals act as hormones and provide coordination in the
vertebrates. The human endocrine system is described here.
CHEMICAL COORDINATION
AND INTEGRATION
CHAPTER  19
19.1 Endocrine
Glands and
Hormones
19.2 Human
Endocrine
System
19.3 Hormones of
Heart, Kidney
and
Gastrointestinal
Tract
19.4 Mechanism of
Hormone Action
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 19 - Page 2 :
 BIOLOGY
240
19.2   HUMAN ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
The endocrine glands and hormone
producing diffused tissues/cells located in
different parts of our body constitute the
endocrine system. Pituitary, pineal,
thyroid, adrenal, pancreas, parathyroid,
thymus and gonads (testis in males and
ovary in females) are the organised
endocrine 
bodies 
in 
our 
body
(Figure 19.1). In addition to these, some
other organs, e.g., gastrointestinal tract,
liver, kidney, heart also produce hormones.
A brief account of the structure and
functions of all major endocrine glands
and hypothalamus of the human body is
given in the following sections.
19.2.1
The Hypothalamus
As you know, the hypothalamus is the
basal part of diencephalon, forebrain
(Figure 19.1) and it regulates a wide
spectrum of body functions. It contains
several groups of neurosecretory cells
called nuclei which produce hormones.
These hormones regulate the synthesis
and secretion of pituitary hormones.
However, the hormones produced by
hypothalamus are of two types, the
releasing hormones (which stimulate secretion of pituitary hormones) and
the inhibiting hormones (which inhibit secretions of pituitary hormones).
For example a hypothalamic hormone called Gonadotrophin releasing
hormone (GnRH) stimulates the pituitary synthesis and release of
gonadotrophins. On the other hand, somatostatin from the hypothalamus
inhibits the release of growth hormone from the pituitary. These hormones
originating in the hypothalamic neurons, pass through axons and are
released from their nerve endings. These hormones reach the pituitary
gland through a portal circulatory system and regulate the functions of
the anterior pituitary. The posterior pituitary is under the direct neural
regulation of the hypothalamus (Figure 19.2).
Figure 19.1 Location of endocrine glands
Testis
(in male)
Ovary
(in female)
Adrenal
Pancreas
Thyroid and
Parathyroid
Thymus
Pineal
Pituitary
Hypothalamus
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 19 - Page 3 :
 241
241
CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION
19.2.2
The Pituitary Gland
The pituitary gland is located in a bony cavity
called sella tursica and is attached to
hypothalamus by a stalk (Figure 19.2). It is
divided anatomically into an adenohypophysis
and a neurohypophysis. Adenohypophysis
consists of two portions, pars distalis and pars
intermedia. The pars distalis region of pituitary,
commonly called anterior pituitary, produces
growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL), thyroid
stimulating 
hormone 
(TSH),
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH),
luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle
stimulating hormone (FSH). Pars intermedia
secretes only one hormone called melanocyte
stimulating hormone (MSH). However, in
humans, the pars intermedia is almost merged
with pars distalis. Neurohypophysis (pars
nervosa) also known as posterior pituitary, stores
and releases two hormones called oxytocin and
vasopressin, which are actually synthesised by
the hypothalamus and are transported axonally to neurohypophysis.
Over-secretion of GH stimulates abnormal growth of the body leading
to gigantism and low secretion of GH results in stunted growth resulting
in pituitary dwarfism. Excess secretion of growth hormone in adults
especially in middle age can result in severe disfigurement (especially of
the face) called Acromegaly, which may lead to serious complications,
and premature death if unchecked. The disease is hard to diagnose in
the early stages and often goes undetected for many years, until changes
in external features become noticeable. Prolactin regulates the growth of
the mammary glands and formation of milk in them. TSH stimulates the
synthesis and secretion of thyroid hormones from the thyroid gland. ACTH
stimulates the synthesis and secretion of steroid hormones called
glucocorticoids from the adrenal cortex. LH and FSH stimulate gonadal
activity and hence are called gonadotrophins. In males, LH stimulates
the synthesis and secretion of hormones called androgens from testis.
In males, FSH and androgens regulate spermatogenesis. In females, LH
induces ovulation of fully mature follicles (graafian follicles) and maintains
the corpus luteum, formed from the remnants of the graafian follicles
after ovulation. FSH stimulates growth and development of the ovarian
Posterior
pituitary
Anterior
pituitary
Hypothalamus
Hypothalamic
neurons
Portal circulation
Figure 19.2 Diagrammatic representation of
pituitary and its relationship with
hypothalamus
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 19 - Page 4 :
 BIOLOGY
242
follicles in females. MSH acts on the melanocytes
(melanin containing cells) and regulates pigmentation
of the skin. Oxytocin acts on the smooth muscles of
our body and stimulates their contraction. In females,
it stimulates a vigorous contraction of uterus at the
time of child birth, and milk ejection from the mammary
gland. Vasopressin acts mainly at the kidney and
stimulates resorption of water and electrolytes by the
distal tubules and thereby reduces loss of water
through urine (diuresis). Hence, it is also called as anti-
diuretic hormone (ADH).
An impairment affecting synthesis or release of ADH
results in a diminished ability of the kidney to conserve
water leading to water loss and dehydration. This
condition is known as Diabetes Insipidus.
19.2.3
The Pineal Gland
The pineal gland is located on the dorsal side of
forebrain. Pineal secretes a hormone called melatonin.
Melatonin plays a very important role in the regulation
of a 24-hour (diurnal) rhythm of our body. For
example, it helps in maintaining the normal rhythms
of sleep-wake cycle, body temperature. In addition,
melatonin also influences metabolism, pigmentation,
the menstrual cycle as well as our defense capability.
19.2.4
Thyroid Gland
The thyroid gland is composed of two lobes which are
located on either side of the trachea (Figure 19.3 a). Both
the lobes are interconnected with a thin flap of connective
tissue called isthmus. The thyroid gland is composed of
follicles and stromal tissues. Each thyroid follicle is
composed of follicular cells, enclosing a cavity. These
follicular 
cells 
synthesise 
two 
hormones,
tetraiodothyronine or thyroxine (T4) and
triiodothyronine (T3). Iodine is essential for the normal
rate of hormone synthesis in the thyroid. Deficiency of
iodine in our diet results in hypothyroidism and
enlargement of the thyroid gland, commonly called
goitre. Hypothyroidism during pregnancy causes
defective development and maturation of the growing
baby leading to stunted growth (cretinism), mental
Figure 19.3 Diagrammatic view of the
position of Thyroid and
Parathyroid
(a) Ventral side
(b) Dorsal side
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 19 - Page 5 :
 243
243
CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION
retardation, low intelligence quotient, abnormal skin, deaf-mutism, etc. In
adult women, hypothyroidism may cause menstrual cycle to become
irregular. Due to cancer of the thyroid gland or due to development of
nodules of the thyroid glands, the rate of synthesis and secretion of the
thyroid hormones is increased to abnormal high levels leading to a condition
called hyperthyroidism which adversely affects the body physiology.
Exopthalmic goitre is a form of hyperthyroidism, characterised by
enlargement of the thyroid gland, protrusion of the eyeballs, increased
basal metabolic rate, and weight loss, also called Graves’ disease.
Thyroid hormones play an important role in the regulation of the basal
metabolic rate. These hormones also support the process of red blood cell
formation. Thyroid hormones control the metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins
and fats. Maintenance of water and electrolyte balance is also influenced by
thyroid hormones. Thyroid gland also secretes a protein hormone called
thyrocalcitonin (TCT) which regulates the blood calcium levels.
19.2.5
Parathyroid Gland
In humans, four parathyroid glands are present on the back side of the
thyroid gland, one pair each in the two lobes of the thyroid gland (Figure
19.3 b). The parathyroid glands secrete a peptide hormone called
parathyroid hormone (PTH). The secretion of PTH is regulated by the
circulating levels of calcium ions.
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) increases the Ca2+ levels in the blood. PTH
acts on bones and stimulates the process of bone resorption (dissolution/
demineralisation). PTH also stimulates reabsorption of Ca2+ by the renal
tubules and increases Ca2+ absorption from the digested food. It is, thus,
clear that PTH is a hypercalcemic hormone, i.e., it increases the blood
Ca2+ levels. Along with TCT, it plays a significant role in calcium balance
in the body.
19.2.6
Thymus
The thymus gland is a lobular structure located between lungs behind
sternum on the ventral side of aorta. The thymus plays a major role in
the development of the immune system. This gland secretes the peptide
hormones called thymosins. Thymosins play a major role in the
differentiation of T-lymphocytes, which provide cell-mediated
immunity. In addition, thymosins also promote production of antibodies
to provide humoral immunity. Thymus is degenerated in old individuals
resulting in a decreased production of thymosins. As a result, the immune
responses of old persons become weak.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 19 - Page 6 :
 BIOLOGY
244
The adrenal medulla secretes two hormones called adrenaline or
epinephrine and noradrenaline or norepinephrine. These are
commonly called as catecholamines. Adrenaline and noradrenaline are
rapidly secreted in response to stress of any kind and during emergency
situations and are called emergency hormones or hormones of Fight
or Flight. These hormones increase alertness, pupilary dilation,
piloerection (raising of hairs), sweating etc. Both the hormones increase
the heart beat, the strength of heart contraction and the rate of respiration.
Catecholamines also stimulate the breakdown of glycogen resulting in
19.2.7
Adrenal Gland
Our body has one pair of adrenal glands, one at the anterior part of each
kidney (Figure 19.4 a). The gland is composed of two types of tissues.
The centrally located tissue is called the adrenal medulla, and outside
this lies the adrenal cortex (Figure 19.4 b).
Underproduction of hormones by the adrenal cortex alters
carbohydrate metabolism causing acute weakness and fatigue leading
to a disease called Addison’s disease.
Figure 19.4  Diagrammatic representation of : (a) Adrenal gland above kidney (b) Section
showing two parts of adrenal gland
Adrenal gland
Adrenal cortex
Kidney
Adrenal medulla
(a)
(b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 19 - Page 7 :
 245
245
CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION
an increased concentration of glucose in blood. In addition, they also
stimulate the breakdown of lipids and proteins.
The adrenal cortex can be divided into three layers, called zona
reticularis (inner layer), zona fasciculata (middle layer) and zona
glomerulosa (outer layer). The adrenal cortex secretes many hormones,
commonly called as corticoids. The corticoids, which are involved in
carbohydrate metabolism are called glucocorticoids. In our body, cortisol
is the main glucocorticoid. Corticoids, which regulate the balance of water
and electrolytes in our body are called mineralocorticoids. Aldosterone is
the main mineralocorticoid in our body.
Glucocorticoids stimulate gluconeogenesis, lipolysis and proteolysis;
and inhibit cellular uptake and utilisation of amino acids. Cortisol is also
involved in maintaining the cardio-vascular system as well as the kidney
functions. Glucocorticoids, particularly cortisol, produces anti-
inflammatory reactions and suppresses the immune response. Cortisol
stimulates the RBC production. Aldosterone acts mainly at the renal
tubules and stimulates the reabsorption of Na+ and water and excretion
of K+ and phosphate ions. Thus, aldosterone helps in the maintenance of
electrolytes, body fluid volume, osmotic pressure and blood pressure.
Small amounts of androgenic steroids are also secreted by the adrenal
cortex which play a role in the growth of axial hair, pubic hair and facial
hair during puberty.
19.2.8
Pancreas
Pancreas is a composite gland (Figure 19.1) which acts as both exocrine
and endocrine gland. The endocrine pancreas consists of ‘Islets of
Langerhans’. There are about 1 to 2 million Islets of Langerhans in a
normal human pancreas representing only 1 to 2 per cent of the pancreatic
tissue. The two main types of cells in the Islet of Langerhans are called
ααααα-cells and βββββ-cells. The α-cells secrete a hormone called glucagon, while
the βββββ-cells secrete insulin.
Glucagon is a peptide hormone, and plays an important role in
maintaining the normal blood glucose levels. Glucagon acts mainly on
the liver cells (hepatocytes) and stimulates glycogenolysis resulting in an
increased blood sugar (hyperglycemia). In addition, this hormone
stimulates the process of gluconeogenesis which also contributes to
hyperglycemia. Glucagon reduces the cellular glucose uptake and
utilisation. Thus, glucagon is a hyperglycemic hormone.
Insulin is a peptide hormone, which plays a major role in the
regulation of glucose homeostasis. Insulin acts mainly on hepatocytes
and adipocytes (cells of adipose tissue), and enhances cellular glucose
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 19 - Page 8 :
 BIOLOGY
246
uptake and utilisation. As a result, there is a rapid movement of glucose
from blood to hepatocytes and adipocytes resulting in decreased blood
glucose levels (hypoglycemia). Insulin also stimulates conversion of
glucose to glycogen (glycogenesis) in the target cells. The glucose
homeostasis in blood is thus maintained jointly by the two – insulin and
glucagons.
Prolonged hyperglycemia leads to a complex disorder called diabetes
mellitus which is associated with loss of glucose through urine and
formation of harmful compounds known as ketone bodies. Diabetic
patients are successfully treated with insulin therapy.
19.2.9
Testis
A pair of testis is present in the scrotal sac (outside abdomen) of male
individuals (Figure 19.1). Testis performs dual functions as a primary
sex organ as well as an endocrine gland. Testis is composed of
seminiferous tubules and stromal or interstitial tissue. The Leydig
cells or interstitial cells, which are present in the intertubular
spaces produce a group of hormones called androgens mainly
testosterone.
Androgens regulate the development, maturation and functions of
the male accessory sex organs like epididymis, vas deferens, seminal
vesicles, prostate gland, urethra etc. These hormones stimulate muscular
growth, growth of facial and axillary hair, aggressiveness, low pitch of
voice etc. Androgens play a major stimulatory role in the process of
spermatogenesis (formation of spermatozoa). Androgens act on the central
neural system and influence the male sexual behaviour (libido). These
hormones produce anabolic (synthetic) effects on protein and carbohydrate
metabolism.
19.2.10
Ovary
Females have a pair of ovaries located in the abdomen (Figure 19.1). Ovary
is the primary female sex organ which produces one ovum during each
menstrual cycle. In addition, ovary also produces two groups of steroid
hormones called estrogen and progesterone. Ovary is composed of
ovarian follicles and stromal tissues. The estrogen is synthesised and
secreted mainly by the growing ovarian follicles. After ovulation, the
ruptured follicle is converted to a structure called corpus luteum, which
secretes mainly progesterone.
Estrogens produce wide ranging actions such as stimulation of growth
and activities of female secondary sex organs, development of growing
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 19 - Page 9 :
 247
247
CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION
ovarian follicles, appearance of female secondary sex characters (e.g., high
pitch of voice, etc.), mammary gland development. Estrogens also regulate
female sexual behaviour.
Progesterone supports pregnancy. Progesterone also acts on the
mammary glands and stimulates the formation of alveoli (sac-like
structures which store milk) and milk secretion.
19.3
HORMONES OF HEART, KIDNEY AND GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Now you know about the endocrine glands and their hormones. However,
as mentioned earlier, hormones are also secreted by some tissues which
are not endocrine glands. For example, the atrial wall of our heart secretes
a very important peptide hormone called atrial natriuretic factor (ANF),
which decreases blood pressure. When blood pressure is increased, ANF
is secreted which causes dilation of the blood vessels. This reduces the
blood pressure.
The juxtaglomerular cells of kidney produce a peptide hormone called
erythropoietin which stimulates erythropoiesis (formation of RBC).
Endocrine cells present in different parts of the gastro-intestinal tract
secrete four major peptide hormones, namely gastrin, secretin,
cholecystokinin (CCK) and gastric inhibitory peptide (GIP). Gastrin
acts on the gastric glands and stimulates the secretion of hydrochloric
acid and pepsinogen. Secretin acts on the exocrine pancreas and
stimulates secretion of water and bicarbonate ions. CCK acts on both
pancreas and gall bladder and stimulates the secretion of pancreatic
enzymes and bile juice, respectively. GIP inhibits gastric secretion and
motility. Several other non-endocrine tissues secrete hormones called
growth factors. These factors are essential for the normal growth of tissues
and their repairing/regeneration.
19.4
MECHANISM OF HORMONE ACTION
Hormones produce their effects on target tissues by binding to specific
proteins called hormone receptors located in the target tissues only.
Hormone receptors present on the cell membrane of the target cells are
called membrane-bound receptors and the receptors present inside the
target cell are called intracellular receptors, mostly nuclear receptors
(present in the nucleus). Binding of a hormone to its receptor leads to the
formation of a hormone-receptor complex (Figure 19.5 a, b). Each
receptor is specific to one hormone only and hence receptors are specific.
Hormone-Receptor complex formation leads to certain biochemical
changes in the target tissue. Target tissue metabolism and hence
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 19 - Page 10 :
 BIOLOGY
248
physiological functions are regulated by hormones. On the basis of their
chemical nature, hormones can be divided into groups :
(i) peptide, polypeptide, protein hormones (e.g., insulin, glucagon,
pituitary hormones, hypothalamic hormones, etc.)
(ii) steroids (e.g., cortisol, testosterone, estradiol and progesterone)
(iii) iodothyronines (thyroid hormones)
(iv) amino-acid derivatives (e.g., epinephrine).
Hormones  which interact with membrane-bound receptors normally
do not enter the target cell, but generate second messengers (e.g., cyclic
AMP, IP3, Ca++ etc) which in turn regulate cellular metabolism (Figure
19.5a). Hormones which interact with intracellular receptors (e.g., steroid
hormones, iodothyronines, etc.) mostly regulate gene expression or
chromosome function by the interaction of hormone-receptor complex
with the genome. Cumulative biochemical actions result in physiological
and developmental effects (Figure 19.5b).
(a)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 19 - Page 11 :
 249
249
CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION
SUMMARY
There are special chemicals which act as hormones and provide chemical
coordination, integration and regulation in the human body. These hormones
regulate metabolism, growth and development of our organs, the endocrine glands
or certain cells. The endocrine system is composed of hypothalamus, pituitary
and pineal, thyroid, adrenal, pancreas, parathyroid, thymus and gonads (testis
and ovary). In addition to these, some other organs, e.g., gastrointestinal tract,
kidney, heart etc., also produce hormones. The pituitary gland is divided into
three major parts, which are called as  pars distalis, pars intermedia and pars
nervosa. Pars distalis produces six trophic hormones. Pars intermedia secretes
Figure 19.5 Diagramatic representation of the mechanism of hormone action :
(a) Protein hormone  (b) Steroid hormone
(b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 19 - Page 12 :
 BIOLOGY
250
only one hormone, while pars nervosa (neurohypophysis) secretes two hormones.
The pituitary hormones regulate the growth and development of somatic tissues
and activities of peripheral endocrine glands. Pineal gland secretes melatonin, which
plays a very important role in the regulation of 24-hour (diurnal) rhythms of our
body (e.g., rhythms of sleep and state of being awake, body temperature, etc.). The
thyroid gland hormones play an important role in the regulation of the basal
metabolic rate, development and maturation of the central neural system,
erythropoiesis, metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins and fats, menstrual cycle.
Another thyroid hormone, i.e., thyrocalcitonin regulates calcium levels in our blood
by decreasing it. The parathyroid glands secrete parathyroid hormone (PTH) which
increases the blood Ca2+ levels and plays a major role in calcium homeostasis. The
thymus gland secretes thymosins which play a major role in the differentiation of
T-lymphocytes, which provide cell-mediated immunity. In addition, thymosins
also increase the production of antibodies to provide humoral immunity. The
adrenal gland is composed of the centrally located adrenal medulla and the outer
adrenal cortex. The adrenal medulla secretes epinephrine and norepinephrine.
These hormones increase alertness, pupilary dilation, piloerection, sweating, heart
beat, strength of heart contraction, rate of respiration, glycogenolysis, lipolysis,
proteolysis. The adrenal cortex secretes glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids.
Glucocorticoids stimulate gluconeogenesis, lipolysis, proteolysis, erythropoiesis,
cardio-vascular system, blood pressure, and glomerular filtration rate and inhibit
inflammatory reactions by suppressing the immune response. Mineralocorticoids
regulate water and electrolyte contents of the body. The endocrine pancreas secretes
glucagon and insulin. Glucagon stimulates glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis
resulting in hyperglycemia. Insulin stimulates cellular glucose uptake and
utilisation, and glycogenesis resulting in hypoglycemia. Insulin deficiency
and/or insulin resistance result in a disease called diabetes mellitus.
The testis secretes androgens, which stimulate the development, maturation
and functions of the male accessory sex organs, appearance of the male secondary
sex characters, spermatogenesis, male sexual behaviour, anabolic pathways and
erythropoiesis. The ovary secretes estrogen and progesterone. Estrogen stimulates
growth and development of female accessory sex organs and secondary sex
characters. Progesterone plays a major role in the maintenance of pregnancy as
well as in mammary gland development and lactation. The atrial wall of the heart
produces atrial natriuretic factor which decreases the blood pressure. Kidney
produces erythropoietin which stimulates erythropoiesis. The gastrointestinal tract
secretes gastrin, secretin, cholecystokinin and gastric inhibitory peptide. These
hormones regulate the secretion of digestive juices and help in digestion.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 19 - Page 13 :
 251
251
CHEMICAL COORDINATION AND INTEGRATION
EXERCISES
1.
Define the following:
(a) Exocrine gland
(b) Endocrine gland
(c) Hormone
2.
Diagrammatically indicate the location of the various endocrine glands in our
body.
3.
List the hormones secreted by the following:
(a) Hypothalamus
(b) Pituitary
(c) Thyroid
(d) Parathyroid
(e) Adrenal
(f) Pancreas
(g) Testis
(h) Ovary
(i) Thymus
(j) Atrium
(k) Kidney
(l) G-I Tract
4.
Fill in the blanks:
Hormones
  Target gland
(a) Hypothalamic hormones
__________________
(b) Thyrotrophin (TSH)
__________________
(c) Corticotrophin (ACTH)
__________________
(d) Gonadotrophins (LH, FSH)
__________________
(e) Melanotrophin (MSH)
__________________
5.
Write short notes on the functions of the following hormones:
(a) Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
(b) Thyroid hormones
(c) Thymosins
(d) Androgens
(e) Estrogens
(f) Insulin and Glucagon
6.
Give example(s) of:
(a) Hyperglycemic hormone and hypoglycemic hormone
(b) Hypercalcemic hormone
(c) Gonadotrophic hormones
(d) Progestational hormone
(e) Blood pressure lowering hormone
(f) Androgens and estrogens
7.
Which hormonal deficiency is responsible for the following:
(a) Diabetes mellitus
(b) Goitre
(c) Cretinism
8.
Briefly mention the mechanism of action of FSH.
9.
Match the following:
Column I
Column II
(a) T4
(i) Hypothalamus
(b) PTH
(ii) Thyroid
(c) GnRH
(iii) Pituitary
(d) LH
(iv) Parathyroid
2024-25


 Book : class_11_biology - Chapter : chapter 19 - Page 14 :
 NOTE
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter a1 - Page 1 :
 215
Appendices
Metre (m): The metre, symbol m, is the SI unit of length. It is defined by taking the fixed 
numerical value of the speed of light in vacuum c to be 299792458 when expressed in 
the unit ms-1, where the second is defined in terms of the caesium frequency.
Kilogram (k): The kilogram, symbol kg, is the SI unit of mass. It is defined by taking the 
fixed numerical value of the planck constant h to be 6.62607015 ×10–34 when expressed 
in the unit Js, which is equal to kgm2s-1, where the metre and the second are defined 
in terms of c and 
Vcs.
Second (s): The symbol s, is the SI unit of time. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical 
value of the caesium frequency 
Vcs, the unperturbed ground-state hyperfine transition 
frequency of the caesium-133 atom, to be 9192631770 when expressed in the unit Hz, 
which is equal to s–1.
Ampere (A): The ampere, symbol A, is the SI unit of electric current. It is defined by 
taking the fixed numerical value of the elementary charge e to be 1.602176634×10–19 when 
expressed in the unit C, which is equal to A s, where the second is defined in terms of. 
Kelvin (K): The Kelvin, symbol K, is the SI unit of thermodynamic temperature. It 
is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the Boltzmann constant K to be 
1.380649×10–23 when expressed in the unit JK–1, which is equal to kgm2s–2K–1, where 
the kilogram, metre and second are defined in terms of h, c and 
Vcs.
Mole (mol): The mole, symbol mol, is the SI unit of amount of substance. One mole 
contains exactly 6.02214076×1023 elementary entities. This number is the fixed 
numerical value of the Avogadro constant, NA, when expressed in the unit mol–1 and 
is called the Avogadro number. The amount of substance, symbol n, of a system is a 
measure of the number of specified elementary entities. An elementary entity may be an 
atom, a molecule, an ion, an electron, any other particle or specified group of particles. 
Candela (cd): The candela, symbol cd is the SI unit of luminous intensity in a given 
direction. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the luminous efficacy of 
monochromatic radiation of frequency 540×1012 Hz, Kcd, to be 683 when expressed 
in the unit lm·W–1, which is equal to cd·sr·W–1, or cd sr kg–1m–2s3, where the kilogram, 
metre and second are defined in terms of h, c and 
Vcs.
(The symbols listed here are internationally agreed and should not be changed in other 
languages and scripts.  
Definitions of the SI Base Units 
Appendix I
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter a1 - Page 2 :
 216
chemistry
Element	
Symbol	
Atomic	
Molar
	
	
Number	
mass/
	
	
	
 (g mol–1)
Actinium	
Ac	
89	
227.03
Aluminium	
Al	
13	
26.98
Americium	
Am	
95	
(243)
Antimony	
Sb	
51	
121.75
Argon	
Ar	
18	
39.95
Arsenic	
As	
33	
74.92
Astatine	
At 	
85	
       210
Barium	
Ba	
56	
137.34
Berkelium	
Bk	
97	
(247)
Beryllium	
Be	
4	
9.01
Bismuth	
Bi	
83	
208.98
Bohrium	
Bh	
107	
(264)
Boron	
B	
5	
10.81
Bromine	
Br	
35	
79.91
Cadmium	
Cd	
48	
112.40
Caesium	
Cs	
55	
132.91
Calcium	
Ca	
20	
40.08
Californium	
Cf	
98	
251.08
Carbon	
C	
6	
12.01
Cerium	
Ce	
58	
140.12
Chlorine	
Cl	
17	
35.45
Chromium	
Cr	
24	
52.00
Cobalt	
Co	
27	
58.93
Copper 	
Cu	
29	
63.54
Curium	
Cm	
96	
247.07
Dubnium	
Db	
105	
(263)
Dysprosium	
Dy	
66	
162.50
Einsteinium	
Es	
99	
(252)
Erbium	
Er	
68	
167.26
Europium	
Eu	
63	
151.96
Fermium	
Fm	
100	
(257.10)
Fluorine	
F	
9	
19.00
Francium	
Fr	
87	
(223)
Gadolinium	
Gd	
64	
157.25
Gallium	
Ga	
31	
69.72
Germanium 	
Ge	
32	
72.61
Gold	
Au	
79	
196.97
Hafnium	
Hf	
72	
178.49
Hassium	
Hs	
108	
(269)
Helium	
He	
2	
4.00
Holmium	
Ho	
67	
164.93
Hydrogen 	
H	
1	
 1.0079
Indium	
In	
49	
  114.82
Iodine	
I	
53	
  126.90 
Iridium	
Ir	
77	
192.2
Iron	
Fe	
26	
55.85
Krypton	
Kr	
36	
83.80
Lanthanum	
La	
57	
138.91
Lawrencium	
Lr	
103	
(262.1)
Lead	
Pb	
82	
207.19
Lithium	
Li	
3	
6.94
Lutetium	
Lu	
71	
174.96
Magnesium	
Mg	
12	
24.31
Manganese	
Mn	
25	
54.94
Meitneium	
Mt	
109	
(268)
Mendelevium	
Md	
101	
258.10
Mercury	
Hg 	
80	
200.59
Molybdenum	
Mo	
42	
95.94
Neodymium	
Nd	
60	
144.24
Neon	
Ne	
10	
20.18
Neptunium	
Np	
93	
(237.05)
Nickel	
Ni	
28	
58.71
Niobium	
Nb	
41	
92.91
Nitrogen	
N	
7	
14.0067
Nobelium	
No	
102	
(259)
Osmium	
Os	
76	
190.2
Oxygen	
O	
8	
16.00
Palladium	
Pd	
46	
106.4
Phosphorus	
P	
15	
30.97
Platinum	
Pt	
78	
195.09
Plutonium	
Pu	
94	
(244)
Polonium	
Po	
84	
210
Potassium	
K	
19	
39.10
Praseodymium	
Pr	
59	
140.91
Promethium	
Pm	
61	
(145)
Protactinium	
Pa	
91	
231.04
Radium	
Ra	
88	
(226)
Radon	
Rn	
86	
(222)
Rhenium	
Re	
75	
186.2
Rhodium	
Rh	
45	
102.91
Rubidium	
Rb	
37	
85.47
Ruthenium	
Ru	
44	
101.07
Rutherfordium	
Rf	
104	
(261)
Samarium	
Sm	
62	
150.35
Scandium	
Sc	
21	
44.96
Seaborgium	
Sg	
106	
(266)
Selenium	
Se	
34	
78.96
Silicon	
Si	
14	
28.08
Silver	
Ag	
47	
107.87
Sodium	
Na	
11	
22.99
Strontium	
Sr	
38	
87.62
Sulphur	
S	
16	
32.06
Tantalum	
Ta	
73	
180.95
Technetium	
Tc	
43	
(98.91)
Tellurium	
Te	
52	
127.60
Terbium	
Tb	
65	
158.92
Thallium	
Tl	
81	
204.37
Thorium	
Th	
90	
232.04
Thulium	
Tm	
69	
168.93
Tin	
Sn	
50	
118.69
Titanium	
Ti	
22	
47.88
Tungsten	
W	
74	
183.85
Ununbium	
Uub	
112	
(277)
Ununnilium	
Uun	
110	
(269)
Unununium	
Uuu	
111	
(272)
Uranium	
U	
92	
238.03
Vanadium	
V	
23	
50.94
Xenon	
Xe	
54	
131.30
Ytterbium	
Yb	
70	
173.04
Yttrium	
Y	
39	
88.91
Zinc	
Zn	
30	
65.37
Zirconium               Zr	
40	
91.22
Element	
Symbol	
Atomic	
Molar
	
	
Number	
mass/
	
	
	
 (g mol–1)
The value given in parenthesis is the molar mass of the isotope of largest known half-life.
Elements, their Atomic Number and Molar Mass
Appendix II
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter a1 - Page 3 :
 217
Appendices
A.	 Specific and Molar Heat Capacities for Some Substances at 298 K and one 
Atmospheric Pressure
Substance	
Specific Heat Capacity	
Molar Heat Capacity
	
 (J/g)	
 (J/mol)
air	
0.720	
20.8
water (liquid)	
4.184	
75.4
ammonia (gas)	
2.06	
35.1
hydrogen chloride	
0.797	
29.1
hydrogen bromide	
0.360	
29.1
ammonia (liquid)	
4.70	
79.9
ethyl alcohol (liquid)	
2.46	
113.16
ethylene glycol (liquid)	
2.42	
152.52
water (solid)	
2.06	
37.08
carbon tetrachloride (liquid)	
0.861	
132.59
chlorofluorocarbon (CCl2F2)	
0.5980	
72.35
ozone 	
0.817	
39.2
neon	
1.03	
20.7
chlorine	
0.477	
33.8
bromine	
0.473	
75.6
iron	
0.460	
25.1
copper	
0.385	
24.7
aluminium	
0.902	
24.35
gold	
0.128	
25.2
graphite	
0.720	
8.65
B.	 Molar Heat Capacities for Some Gases (J/mol)
Gas	
Cp	
C­v	
Cp - C­v	
Cp / C­v
Monatomic*	
	
	
	
	
helium 	
20.9	
12.8	
8.28	
1.63
	
argon	
20.8	
12.5	
8.33	
1.66
	
iodine	
20.9	
12.6	
8.37	
1.66
	
mercury	
20.8	
12.5	
8.33	
1.66
Diatomic†	
	
	
	
	
hydrogen	
28.6	
20.2	
8.33	
1.41
	
oxygen	
29.1	
20.8	
8.33	
1.39
	
nitrogen	
29.0	
20.7	
8.30	
1.40
	
hydrogen chloride 	
29.6	
21.0	
8.60	
1.39
	
carbon monoxide	
29.0	
21.0	
8.00	
1.41
Triatomic†	
	
	
	
	
nitrous oxide	
39.0	
30.5	
8.50	
1.28
	
carbon dioxide	
37.5	
29.0	
8.50	
1.29
Polyatomic†	
	
	
	
	
ethane	
53.2	
44.6	
8.60	
1.19
*Translational kinetic energy only.
†Translational, vibrational and rotational energy. 
Appendix III
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter a1 - Page 4 :
 218
chemistry
Physical Constants
Quantity	
Symbol	 Traditional Units	
SI Units
Acceleration of gravity 	
g	
980.6 cm/s	
9.806 m/s 
Atomic mass unit (1/12	
amu	
1.6606 × 10-24 g	
1.6606 × 10-27 kg 
the mass of 12C atom)	
 or u
Avogadro  constant	
NA	
6.022 ×1023 	
6.022 × 1023 
	
	
particles/mol	
particles/mol
Bohr radius	
ao	
0.52918   	
5.2918 × 10-11 m
	
	
5.2918 × 10-9 cm
Boltzmann constant	
k	
1.3807 × 10-16 erg/K	
1.3807 × 10-23 J/K 
Charge-to-mass 	
e/m	
1.758820 ×l08 coulomb/g  	1.7588 × 1011 C/kg
ratio of electron
Electronic charge	
e	
1.602176 × 10-19 coulomb	 1.60219 × 10-19 C
	
	
4.8033 × 10-19 esu
Electron rest mass	
me	
9.109382 ×10-28 g 	
9.10952 ×10-31 kg
	
	
0.00054859 u
Faraday constant	
F	
96,487 coulombs/eq	
96,487 C/mol e-
	
	
23.06 kcal/volt. eq	
96,487 J/V.mol e-
Gas constant	
R	
0.8206 L atm
mol K 	
8.3145 kPa dm
mol K
3
	
	
1.987 
cal
mol K 	
8.3145 J/mol.K
Molar volume (STP)	
Vm	
22.710981 L/mol	
22.710981 × 10-3 m3/mol
	
	
	
22.710981 dm3/mol 
Neutron rest mass	
mn	
1.674927 × 10-24 g  	
1.67495 × 10-27  kg
	
	
1.008665 u
Planck constant 	
h	
6.6262 × 10-27 ergs	
6.6262 ×  10-34 J s  
Proton rest mass 	
mp	
1.6726216 ×10-24 g  	
1.6726 ×10-27 kg
	
	
1.007277 u
Rydberg constant 	
R∞	
3.289 × 1015 cycles/s  	
1.0974 × 107 m-1
	
	
2.1799 × 10-11 erg	
2.1799 × 10-18 J
Speed of light 	
c	
2.9979 ×1010 cm/s	
2.9979 × 108 m/s
(in a vacuum)	
	
(186,281 miles/second)
π = 3.1416  	
	
 2.303 R = 4.576 cal/mol  K = 19.15 J/mol K
e = 2.71828	
	
 2.303 RT (at 25°C) = 1364 cal/mol = 5709 J/mol
ln X = 2.303 log X 
Appendix IV
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter a1 - Page 5 :
 219
Appendices
Common Unit of Mass and Weight
1 pound = 453.59 grams
1 pound  = 453.59 grams = 0.45359 kilogram
1 kilogram = 1000 grams = 2.205 pounds
1 gram = 10 decigrams = 100 centigrams
	
 =  1000 milligrams
1 gram = 6.022 × 1023 atomic mass units or u
1 atomic mass unit = 1.6606 × 10–24 gram
1 metric tonne = 1000 kilograms
	
	            = 2205 pounds
Common Unit of Volume
1 quart = 0.9463 litre
1 litre  = 1.056 quarts
1 litre = 1 cubic decimetre = 1000 cubic
centimetres = 0.001 cubic metre
1 millilitre = 1 cubic centimetre = 0.001 litre
	
	     = 1.056 × 10-3 quart
1 cubic foot = 28.316 litres = 29.902 quarts
	
	       = 7.475 gallons
Common Units of Energy
1 joule = 1 × 107  ergs
1 thermochemical calorie**
	
	 	
	
=  4.184 joules
	
	 	
	
= 4.184  × 107 ergs
= 4.129 × 10–2 litre-atmospheres
= 2.612 × 1019 electron volts
1 ergs = 1 × 10–7 joule = 2.3901 × 10–8 calorie
1 electron volt = 1.6022 × 10–19 joule
	
	           = 1.6022 × 10–12 erg
	
	           = 96.487 kJ/mol†
1 litre-atmosphere = 24.217 calories
	
	 	
   = 101.32 joules
	
	 	
   = 1.0132 ×109 ergs
1 British thermal unit = 1055.06  joules
	
= 1.05506 ×1010 ergs
	
= 252.2 calories
Common Units of Length
1 inch = 2.54 centimetres (exactly)
1 mile = 5280 feet = 1.609 kilometres
1 yard = 36 inches = 0.9144 metre
1 metre = 100 centimetres = 39.37 inches
	
	 = 3.281 feet
	
	 = 1.094 yards
1 kilometre = 1000 metres  = 1094 yards
	
= 0.6215 mile
1 Angstrom = 1.0 × 10–8 centimetre
	
       = 0.10 nanometre
	
       =  1.0 × 10–10 metre
	
       = 3.937 × 10–9 inch
Common Units of Force* and Pressure
1 atmosphere = 760 millimetres of mercury
	
	          = 1.013 × 105 pascals
	
	             = 14.70 pounds per square inch
1 bar = 105 pascals
1 torr = 1 millimetre of mercury
1 pascal = 1 kg/ms2 = 1 N/m2  
Temperature
SI Base Unit: Kelvin (K)
K  = -273.15°C
K  =  °C + 273.15
°F = 1.8(°C) + 32
*	 Force: 1 newton (N) = 1 kg m/s2, i.e., the force that, when applied for 1 second, gives a  
1-kilogram mass a velocity of 1 metre per second.
**	 The amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one gram of water from 14.50C to 
15.50C.
†	 Note that the other units are per particle and must be multiplied by 6.022 ×1023 to be strictly 
comparable. 
Some Useful Conversion Factors
Appendix V
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter a1 - Page 6 :
 220
chemistry
INORGANIC SUBSTANCES
Substance	
Enthalpy of formation,	
Gibbs Energy of formation,	
Entropy,* 
	
∆fH/ (kJ mol–1)	
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1)	
S/(J K–1 mol–1)
Aluminium	
Al(s)	
0	
0	
28.33
Al3+(aq)	
– 524.7	
–481.2	
–321.7
Al2O3(s)	
–1675.7	
–1582.3	
50.92
Al(OH)3(s)	
–1276	
—	
—
AlCl3(s)	
–704.2	
–628.8	
110.67
Antimony
SbH3(g)	
145.11	
147.75	
232.78
SbCl3(g)	
–313.8	
–301.2	
337.80
SbCl5(g)	
–394.34	
–334.29	
401.94
Arsenic
As(s), gray	
0	
0	
35.1
As2S3(s)	
–169.0	
–168.6	
163.6
AsO4
3–(aq)	
–888.14	
–648.41	
–162.8
Barium
Ba(s)	
0	
0	
62.8
Ba2+(aq)	
–537.64	
–560.77	
9.6
BaO(s)	
–553.5	
–525.1	
70.42
BaCO3(s)	
–1216.3	
–1137.6	
112.1
BaCO3(aq)	
–1214.78	
–1088.59	
–47.3
Boron
B(s)	
0	
0	
5.86
B2O3(s)	
–1272.8	
–1193.7	
53.97
BF3(g)	
–1137.0	
–1120.3	
254.12
Bromine
Br2(l)	
0	
0	
152.23
Br2(g)	
30.91	
3.11	
245.46
Br(g)	
111.88	
82.40	
175.02
Br–(aq)	
–121.55	
–103.96	
82.4
HBr(g)	
–36.40	
–53.45	
198.70
BrF3(g)	
–255.60	
–229.43	
292.53
Calcium
Ca(s)	
0	
0	
41.42
Ca(g)	
178.2	
144.3	
154.88
Ca2+(aq)	
–542.83	
–553.58	
–53.1
(continued)
Thermodynamic Data at 298 K
Appendix VI
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter a1 - Page 7 :
 221
Appendices
Calcium (continued)
CaO(s)	
–635.09	
–604.03	
39.75
Ca(OH)2(s)	
–986.09	
–898.49	
83.39
Ca(OH)2(aq)	
–1002.82	
–868.07	
–74.5
CaCO3(s), calcite	
–1206.92	
–1128.8	
92.9
CaCO3(s), aragonite	
–1207.1	
–1127.8	
88.7
CaCO3(aq)	
–1219.97	
–1081.39	
–110.0
CaF2(s)	
–1219.6	
–1167.3	
68.87
CaF2(aq)	
–1208.09	
–1111.15	
–80.8
CaCl2(s)	
–795.8	
–748.1	
104.6
CaCl2(aq)	
–877.1	
–816.0	
59.8
CaBr2(s)	
–682.8	
–663.6	
130
CaC2(s)	
–59.8	
–64.9	
69.96
CaS(s)	
–482.4	
–477.4	
56.5
CaSO4(s)	
–1434.11	
–1321.79	
106.7
CaSO4(aq)	
–1452.10	
–1298.10	
–33.1
Carbon**
C(s), graphite	
0	
0	
5.740
C(s), diamond	
1.895	
2.900	
2.377
C(g)	
716.68	
671.26	
158.10
CO(g)	
–110.53	
–137.17	
197.67
CO2(g)	
–393.51	
–394.36	
213.74
CO3
2–(aq)	
–677.14	
–527.81	
–56.9
CCl4(l)	
–135.44	
–65.21	
216.40
CS2(l)	
89.70	
65.27	
151.34
HCN(g)	
135.1	
124.7	
201.78
HCN(l)	
108.87	
124.97	
112.84
Cerium
Ce(s)	
0	
0	
72.0
Ce3+(aq)	
–696.2	
–672.0	
–205
Ce4+(aq)	
–537.2	
–503.8	
–301
Chlorine
Cl2(g)	
0	
0	
223.07
Cl(g)	
121.68	
105.68	
165.20
Cl–­(aq)	
–167.16	
–131.23	
56.5
HCl(g)	
–92.31	
–95.30	
186.91
HCl(aq)	
–167.16	
–131.23	
56.5
Copper
Cu(s)	
0	
0	
33.15
Cu+(aq)	
71.67	
49.98	
40.6
Cu2+(aq)	
64.77	
65.49	
–99.6
Cu2O(aq)	
–168.6	
–146.0	
93.14
CuO(s)	
–157.3	
–129.7	
42.63
CuSO4(s)	
–771.36	
–661.8	
109
CuSO4.5H2O(s)	
–2279.7	
–1879.7	
300.4
(continued)
Substance	
Enthalpy of formation,	
Gibbs Energy of formation,	
Entropy,* 
	
∆fH/ (kJ mol–1)	
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1)	
S/(J K–1 mol–1)
** For organic compounds, a separate table is provided in continuation.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter a1 - Page 8 :
 222
chemistry
Deuterium
D2(g)	
0	
0	
144.96
D2O(g)	
–249.20	
–234.54	
198.34
D2O(l)	
–294.60	
–243.44	
75.94 
Fluorine
F2(g)	
0	
0	
202.78
F–(aq)	
–332.63	
–278.79	
–13.8
HF(g)	
–271.1	
–273.2	
173.78
HF(aq)	
–332.63	
–278.79	
–13.8
Hydrogen (see also Deuterium)
H2(g)	
0	
0	
130.68
H(g)	
217.97	
203.25	
114.71
H+(aq)	
0	
0	
0
H2O(l)	
–285.83	
–237.13	
69.91
H2O(g)	
–241.82	
–228.57	
188.83
H2O2(l)	
–187.78	
–120.35	
109.6
H2O2(aq)	
–191.17	
–134.03	
143.9
Iodine
I2(s)	
0	
0	
116.14
I2(g)	
62.44	
19.33	
260.69
I–(aq)	
–55.19	
–51.57	
111.3
HI(g)	
26.48	
1.70	
206.59
Iron
Fe(s)	
0	
0	
27.28
Fe2+(aq)	
–89.1	
–78.90	
–137.7
Fe3+(aq)	
–48.5	
–4.7	
–315.9
Fe3O4(s), magnetite	
–1118.4	
–1015.4	
146.4
Fe2O3(s), haematite	
–824.2	
–742.2	
87.40
FeS(s,α)	
–100.0	
–100.4	
60.29
FeS(aq)	
—	
6.9	
—
FeS2(s)	
–178.2	
–166.9	
52.93
Lead
Pb(s)	
0	
0	
64.81
Pb2+(aq)	
–1.7	
–24.43	
10.5
PbO2(s)	
–277.4	
–217.33	
68.6
PbSO4(s)	
–919.94	
–813.14	
148.57
PbBr2(s)	
–278.7	
–261.92	
161.5
PbBr2(aq)	
–244.8	
–232.34	
175.3
Magnesium
Mg(s)	
0	
0	
32.68
Mg(g)	
147.70	
113.10	
148.65
Mg2+(aq)	
–466.85	
–454.8	
–138.1
MgO(s)	
–601.70	
–569.43	
26.94
MgCO3(s)	
–1095.8	
–1012.1	
65.7
MgBr2(s)	
–524.3	
–503.8	
117.2
(continued)
Substance	
Enthalpy of formation,	
Gibbs Energy of formation,	
Entropy,* 
	
∆fH/ (kJ mol–1)	
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1)	
S/(J K–1 mol–1)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter a1 - Page 9 :
 223
Appendices
Mercury
Hg(1)	
0	
0	
76.02
Hg(g)	
61.32	
31.82	
174.96
HgO(s)	
–90.83	
–58.54	
70.29
Hg2Cl2(s)	
–265.22	
–210.75	
192.5
Nitrogen
N2(g)	
0	
0	
191.61
NO(g)	
90.25	
86.55	
210.76
N2O(g)	
82.05	
104.20	
219.85
NO2(g)	
33.18	
51.31	
240.06
N2O4(g)	
9.16	
97.89	
304.29
HNO3(1)	
–174.10	
–80.71	
155.60
HNO3(aq)	
–207.36	
–111.25	
146.4
NO3
– (aq)	
–205.0	
–108.74	
146.4
NH3(g)	
–46.11	
–16.45	
192.45
NH3(aq)	
–80.29	
–26.50	
111.3
NH+
4 (aq)	
–132.51	
–79.31	
113.4
NH2OH(s)	
–114.2	
—	
—
HN3(g)	
294.1	
328.1	
238.97
N2H4(1)	
50.63	
149.34	
121.21
NH4NO3(s)	
–365.56	
–183.87	
151.08
NH4Cl(s)	
–314.43	
–202.87	
94.6
NH4ClO4(s)	
–295.31	
–88.75	
186.2
Oxygen
O2(g)	
0	
0	
205.14
O3(g)	
142.7	
163.2	
238.93
OH–(aq)	
–229.99	
–157.24	
–10.75
Phosphorus
P(s), white	
0	
0	
41.09
P4(g)	
58.91	
24.44	
279.98
PH3(g)	
5.4	
13.4	
210.23
P4O10(s)	
–2984.0	
–2697.0	
228.86
H3PO3(aq)	
–964.8	
—	
—
H3PO4(1)	
–1266.9	
—	
—
H3PO4(aq)	
–1277.4	
–1018.7	
—
PCl3(1)	
–319.7	
–272.3	
217.18
PCl3(g)	
–287.0	
–267.8	
311.78
PCl5(g)	
–374.9	
–305.0	
364.6
Potassium
K(s)	
0	
0	
64.18
K(g)	
89.24	
60.59	
160.34
K+(aq)	
–252.38	
–283.27	
102.5
KOH(s)	
–424.76	
–379.08	
78.9
KOH(aq)	
–482.37	
–440.50	
91.6
KF(s)	
–567.27	
–537.75	
66.57
(continued)
Substance	
Enthalpy of formation,	
Gibbs Energy of formation,	
Entropy,* 
	
∆fH/ (kJ mol–1)	
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1)	
S/(J K–1 mol–1)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter a1 - Page 10 :
 224
chemistry
Potassium (continued)
KCl(s)	
–436.75	
–409.14	
82.59
KBr(s)	
–393.80	
–380.66	
95.90
KI(s)	
–327.90	
–324.89	
106.32
KClO3(s)	
–397.73	
–296.25	
143.1
KClO4(s)	
–432.75	
–303.09	
151.0
K2S(s)	
–380.7	
–364.0	
105
K2S(aq)	
–471.5	
–480.7	
190.4
Silicon
Si(s)	
0	
0	
18.83
SiO2(s,α)	
–910.94	
–856.64	
41.84
Silver
Ag(s)	
0	
0	
42.55
Ag+(aq)	
105.58	
77.11	
72.68
Ag2O(s)	
–31.05	
–11.20	
121.3
AgBr(s)	
–100.37	
–96.90	
107.1
AgBr(aq)	
–15.98	
–26.86	
155.2
AgCl(s)	
–127.07	
–109.79	
96.2
AgCl(aq)	
–61.58	
–54.12	
129.3
AgI(s)	
–61.84	
–66.19	
115.5
AgI(aq)	
50.38	
25.52	
184.1
AgNO3(s)	
–124.39	
–33.41	
140.92
Sodium
Na(s)	
0	
0	
51.21
Na(g)	
107.32	
76.76	
153.71
Na+(aq)	
–240.12	
–261.91	
59.0
NaOH(s)	
–425.61	
–379.49	
64.46
NaOH(aq)	
–470.11	
–419.15	
48.1
NaCl(s)	
–411.15	
–384.14	
72.13
NaCl(aq)	
–407.3	
–393.1	
115.5
NaBr(s)	
–361.06	
–348.98	
86.82
NaI(s)	
–287.78	
–286.06	
98.53
NaHCO3(s)	
–947.7	
–851.9	
102.1
Na2CO3(s)	
–1130.9	
–1047.7	
136.0
Sulphur
S(s), rhombic	
0	
0	
31.80
S(s), monoclinic	
0.33	
0.1	
32.6
S2–(aq)	
33.1	
85.8	
–14.6
SO2(g)	
–296.83	
–300.19	
248.22
SO3(g)	
–395.72	
–371.06	
256.76
H2SO4(l)	
–813.99	
–690.00	
156.90
H2SO4(aq)	
–909.27	
–744.53	
20.1
SO4
2–(aq)	
–909.27	
–744.53	
20.1
H2S(g)	
–20.63	
–33.56	
205.79
H2S(aq)	
–39.7	
–27.83	
121
SF6(g)	
–1209	
–1105.3	
291.82
Substance	
Enthalpy of formation,	
Gibbs Energy of formation,	
Entropy,* 
	
∆fH/ (kJ mol–1)	
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1)	
S/(J K–1 mol–1)
(continued)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter a1 - Page 11 :
 225
Appendices
Tin	
Sn(s), white	
0	
0	
51.55
Sn(s), gray	
–2.09	
0.13	
44.14
SnO(s)	
–285.8	
–256.9	
56.5
SnO2(s)	
–580.7	
–519.6	
52.3
Zinc
Zn(s)	
0	
0	
41.63
Zn2+(aq)	
–153.89	
–147.06	
–112.1
ZnO(s)	
–348.28	
–318.30	
43.64
Zn(g)	
+130.73	
+95.14	
160.93
*The entropies of individual ions in solution are determined by setting the entropy of H+ in water equal to 
0 and then defining the entropies of all other ions relative to this value; hence a negative entropy is one 
that is lower than the entropy of H+ in water.
ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
Substance	
Enthalpy of 	
Enthalpy of 	
Gibbs Energy of 
	
combustion, 	
formation,	
formation,	
Entropy,
	
∆cH/ (kJ mol–1)	 ∆fH/ (kJ mol–1) 
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1)	 S/(J K–1 mol–1)
Hydrocarbons
CH4(g), methane	
–890	
–74.81	
–50.72	
186.26
C2H2(g), ethyne (acetylene)	
–1300	
226.73	
209.20	
200.94
C2H4(g), ethene(ethylene)	
–1411	
52.26	
68.15	
219.56
C2H6(g), ethane	
–1560	
–84.68	
–32.82	
229.60
C3H6(g), propene (propylene)	
–2058	
20.42	
62.78	
266.6
C3H6(g), cyclopropane	
–2091	
53.30	
104.45	
237.4
C3H8(g), propane	
–2220	
–103.85	
–23.49	
270.2
C4H10(g), butane	
–2878	
–126.15	
–17.03	
310.1
C5H12(g), pentane	
–3537	
–146.44	
–8.20	
349
C6H6(l), benzene	
–3268	
49.0	
124.3	
173.3
C6H6(g)	
–3302	
—	
—	
—
C7H8(l), toluene	
–3910	
12.0	
113.8	
221.0
C7H8(g)	
–3953	
—	
—	
—
C6H12(l), cyclohexane	
–3920	
–156.4	
26.7	
204.4
C6H12(g), 	
–3953	
—	
—	
—
C8H18(l), octane 	
–5471	
–249.9	
6.4	
358
Alcohols and phenols	
	
	
	
CH3OH(l), methanol	
–726	
–238.86	
–166.27	
126.8
CH3OH(g)	
–764	
–200.66	
–161.96	
239.81
C2H5OH(l), ethanol	
–1368	
–277.69	
–174.78	
160.7
C2H5OH(g)	
–1409	
–235.10	
–168.49	
282.70
C6H5OH(s), phenol	
–3054	
–164.6	
–50.42	
144.0	
(continued)
Substance	
Enthalpy of formation,	
Gibbs Energy of formation,	
Entropy,* 
	
∆fH/ (kJ mol–1)	
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1)	
S/(J K–1 mol–1)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter a1 - Page 12 :
 226
chemistry
Carboxylic acid
HCOOH(l), formic acid	
–255	
–424.72	
–361.35	
128.95	 
CH3COOH(l), acetic acid	
–875	
–484.5	
–389.9	
159.8
CH3COOH (aq)	
—	
–485.76	
–396.64	
86.6
(COOH)2(s), oxalic acid	
–254	
–827.2	
–697.9	
120
C6H5COOH(s), benzoic acid	
–3227	
–385.1	
–245.3	
167.6
Aldehydes and ketones
HCHO(g), methanal	
–571	
–108.57	
–102.53	
218.77
(formaldehyde)	
CH3CHO(l), ethanal	
–1166	
–192.30	
–128.12	
160.2
(acetaldehyde)
CH3CHO(g)	
–1192	
–166.19	
–128.86	
250.3
CH3COCH3(l), propanone	
–1790	
–248.1	
–155.4	
200
(acetone)
Sugars
C6H12O6(s), glucose	
–2808	
–1268	
–910	
212
C6H12O6(aq)	
—	
—	
–917	
—
C6H12O6(s), fructose	
–2810	
–1266	
—	
—
C12H22O11(s), sucrose	
–5645	
–2222	
–1545	
360
Nitrogen compounds
CO(NH2)2(s), urea	
–632	
–333.51	
–197.33	
104.60
C6H5NH2(l), aniline	
–3393	
31.6	
149.1	
191.3
NH2CH2COOH(s), glycine	
–969	
–532.9	
–373.4	
103.51
CH3NH2(g), methylamine	
–1085	
–22.97	
32.16	
243.41
Substance	
Enthalpy of 	
Enthalpy of 	
Gibbs Energy of 
	
combustion, 	
formation,	
formation,	
Entropy,
	
∆cH/ (kJ mol–1)	 ∆fH/ (kJ mol–1) 
∆fG/ (kJ mol–1)	 S/(J K–1 mol–1)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter a1 - Page 13 :
 227
Appendices
Standard potentials at 298 K in electrochemical order
Reduction half-reaction	
E/V
H4XeO6 + 2H+ + 2e– → XeO3 + 3H2O	
+3.0
F2 + 2e– → 2F–	
+2.87
O3 + 2H+ + 2e– → O2 + H2O	
+2.07
S2O
2–
8 + 2e– → 2SO
2–
4	
+2.05
Ag+ + e– → Ag+	
+1.98
Co3+ + e– → Co2+	
+1.81
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e– → 2H2O	
+1.78
Au+ + e– → Au	
+1.69
Pb4+ + 2e– → Pb2+	
+1.67
2HClO + 2H+ + 2e– → Cl2 + 2H2O	
+1.63
Ce4+ + e– → Ce3+	
+1.61
2HBrO + 2H+ + 2e– → Br2 + 2H2O	
+1.60
MnO
–
4 + 8H+ + 5e– → Mn2+ + 4H2O	
+1.51
Mn3+ + e– → Mn2+	
+1.51
Au3+ + 3e– → Au	
+1.40
Cl2 + 2e– → 2Cl–	
+1.36
Cr2O
2–
7 + 14H+ + 6e– → 2Cr3+ + 7H2O	
+1.33
O3 + H2O + 2e– → O2 + 2OH–	
+1.24
O2 + 4H+ + 4e– → 2H2O	
+1.23
ClO–
4 + 2H+ +2e– → ClO–
3 + 2H2O	
+1.23
MnO2 + 4H+ + 2e– → Mn2+ + 2H2O	
+1.23
Pt2+ + 2e– → Pt	
+1.20
Br2 + 2e– → 2Br–	
+1.09
Pu4+ + e– → Pu3+	
+0.97
NO–
3 + 4H+ + 3e– → NO + 2H2O	
+0.96
2Hg2+ + 2e– → Hg2+
2	
+0.92
ClO– + H2O + 2e– → Cl– + 2OH–	
+0.89
Hg2+ + 2e– → Hg	
+0.86
NO–
3 + 2H+ + e– → NO2 + H2O	
+0.80
Ag+ + e– → Ag	
+0.80
Hg2+
2 +2e– → 2Hg	
+0.79
Fe3+ + e– → Fe2+	
+0.77
BrO– + H2O + 2e– → Br– + 2OH–	
+0.76
Hg2SO4 +2e– → 2Hg + SO2–
4	
+0.62
MnO2–
4 + 2H2O + 2e– → MnO2 + 4OH–	 +0.60
MnO–
4 + e– → MnO2–
4	
+0.56
I2 + 2e– → 2I–	
+0.54
I
–
3 + 2e– → 3I–	
+0.53
Reduction half-reaction	
E/V
Cu+ + e– → Cu	
+0.52
NiOOH + H2O + e– → Ni(OH)2 + OH–	
+0.49
Ag2CrO4 + 2e– → 2Ag + CrO2–
4	
+0.45
O2 + 2H2O + 4e– → 4OH–	
+0.40
ClO–
4 + H2O + 2e– → ClO–
3 + 2OH–	
+0.36
[Fe(CN)6]3– + e– → [Fe(CN)6]4–	
+0.36
Cu2+ + 2e– → Cu	
+0.34
Hg2Cl2 + 2e– → 2Hg + 2Cl–	
+0.27
AgCl + e– → Ag + Cl–	
+0.27
Bi3+ + 3e– → Bi	
+0.20
SO4
2   – + 4H+ + 2e– → H2SO3 + H2O	
+0.17
Cu2+ + e– → Cu+	
+0.16
Sn4+ + 2e– → Sn2+	
+0.15
AgBr + e– → Ag + Br–	
+0.07
Ti4+ + e– → Ti3+	
 0.00
2H+ + 2e– → H2	
 0.0 by
                                                 	
definition
Fe3+ + 3e– → Fe	
–0.04
O2 + H2O + 2e– → HO–
2 + OH–	
–0.08
Pb2+ + 2e– → Pb	
–0.13
In+ + e– → In	
–0.14
Sn2+ + 2e– → Sn	
–0.14
AgI + e– → Ag + I–	
–0.15
Ni2+ + 2e– → Ni	
–0.23
V3+ + e– → V2+	
–0.26
Co2+ + 2e– → Co	
–0.28
In3+ + 3e– → In	
–0.34
Tl+ + e– → Tl	
–0.34
PbSO4 + 2e– → Pb + SO2–
4	
–0.36
Ti3+ + e– → Ti2+	
–0.37
Cd2+ + 2e– → Cd	
–0.40
In2+ + e– → In+	
–0.40
Cr3+ + e– → Cr2+	
–0.41
Fe2+ + 2e– → Fe	
–0.44
In3+ + 2e– → In+	
–0.44
S + 2e– → S2–	
–0.48
In3+ + e– → In2+	
–0.49
U4+ + e– → U3+	
–0.61
Cr3+ + 3e– → Cr	
–0.74
Zn2+ + 2e– → Zn	
–0.76
(continued)
Appendix VII
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter a1 - Page 14 :
 228
chemistry
Reduction half-reaction	
E/V
Cd(OH)2 + 2e– → Cd + 2OH–	
–0.81
2H2O + 2e– → H2 + 2OH–	
–0.83
Cr2+ + 2e– → Cr	
–0.91
Mn2+ + 2e– → Mn	
–1.18
V2+ + 2e– → V	
–1.19
Ti2+ + 2e– → Ti	
–1.63
Al3+ + 3e– → Al	
–1.66
U3+ + 3e– → U	
–1.79
Sc3+ + 3e– → Sc	
–2.09
Mg2+ + 2e– → Mg	
–2.36
Ce3+ + 3e– → Ce	
–2.48
Reduction half-reaction	
E/V
La3+ + 3e– → La	
–2.52
Na+ + e– → Na	
–2.71
Ca2+ + 2e– → Ca	
–2.87
Sr2+ + 2e– → Sr	
–2.89
Ba2+ + 2e– → Ba	
–2.91
Ra2+ + 2e– → Ra	
–2.92
Cs+ + e– → Cs	
–2.92
Rb+ + e– → Rb	
–2.93
K+ +e– → K	
–2.93
Li+ + e– → Li	
–3.05
Appendix  continued
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 1 :
 229
answers
Unit 1
1.17	
~ 15 × 10–4 g , 1.25 × 10–4 m 
1.18	
(i)	 4.8 × 10–3	
(ii)	 2.34 × 105	
(iii)	 8.008 × 103	
(iv)	 5.000 × 102	
	
(v)	 6.0012 
1.19	
(i)	 2	
(ii)	 3	
(iii)	 4	
(iv)	 3	
	
(v)	 4	
(vi)	 5
1.20	
(i)	 34.2	
(ii)	 10.4	
(iii)	 0.0460	
(iv)	 2810
1.21	
(a)	 law of multiple proportion	
(b)	 (i) Ans : (106 mm, 1015 pm)  
	
	
	
	
	
	
(ii) Ans : (10–6 kg, 106 ng)
	
	
	
	
	
	
(iii) Ans : (10–3 L, 10–3 dm3)
1.22	
6.00 × 10–1 m =0.600 m
1.23	
(i)	 B is limiting	
(ii)	 A is limiting
	
(iii)	Stoichiometric mixture –No	
(iv)	 B is limiting
	
(v)	 A is limiting
1.24	
(i)	 2.43 × 103 g	
(ii)	 Yes
	
(iii)	Hydrogen will remain unreacted; 5.72 × 102g
1.26	
Ten volumes
1.27	
(i)	
2.87 × 10–11m	
(ii)	
1.515 × 10–11 m	
(iii)	 2.5365 × 10–2kg
1.30	
1.99265 × 10–23g
1.31	
(i)	
3	
(ii)	
4	
(iii)	 4
1.32	
39.948 g mol–1
1.33	
(i)	
3.131 × 1025  atoms	
(ii)	
13 atoms	
(iii)	 7.8286 × 1024 atoms
1.34	
Empirical formula CH, molar mass 26.0 g mol–1, molecular formula C2H2
1.35	
0.94 g CaCO3
1.36	
8.40 g HCl 
UNIT 2
2.1	
(i)	 1.099 × 1027
 electrons	
(ii)	 5.48 × 10–7 kg, 9.65 × 104C
2.2	
(i)	 6.022 × 1024 electrons
	
(ii)	 (a)  2.4088 × 1021 neutrons	 (b)  4.0347 × 10–6 kg
	
(iii)	(a)  1.2044 × 1022 protons	
(b)  2.015 × 10–5 kg
2.3	
7,6: 8,8: 12,12: 30,26: 50, 38
2.4	
(i)	 Cl	
(ii)	 U	
(iii)	Be
2.5	
5.17 × 1014 s–1, 1.72 × 106m–1
2.6	
(i)	 1.988 × 10–18 J	
(ii)	 3.98 × 10–15 J
Answer to Some Selected Problems
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 2 :
 230
chemistry
2.7	
6.0 × 10–2 m,  5.0 × 109 s–1 and  16.66 m–1
2.8	
2.012 × 1016 photons
2.9	
(i) 4.97 × 10–19 J (3.10 eV); 	 (ii)	 0.97 eV	
(iii)	5.84 × 105 m s–1
2.10	
494 kJ mol–1
2.11	
7.18 × 1019s–1
2.12	
4.41 × 1014s–1, 2.91 × 10–19J
2.13	
486 nm
2.14	
8.72 × 10–20J
2.15	
15 emission lines
2.16	
(i)	 8.72 × 10–20J	
(ii)	 1.3225 nm
2.17	
1.523 × 106 m–1
2.18	
2.08 × 10–11 ergs, 950 Å
2.19	
3647Å
2.20	
3.55 × 10–11m
2.21	
8967Å
2.22	
Na+, Mg2+, Ca2+; Ar, S2– and  K+
2.23	
(i)  (a)  1s2   (b)  1s2 2s2 2p6;   (c)  1s22s22p6   (d)  1s22s22p6
2.24	
n = 5
2.25	
n = 3; l = 2; ml = –2, –1, 0, +1, +2 (any one value)
2.26	
(i) 29 protons
2.27	
1, 2, 15
2.28	
(i)   l	
ml
	
	
0	
0
	
	
1	
–1,0,+1
	
	
2	
–2,–1,0,+1,+2
	
(ii)	 l  = 2; ml =–2, –1,0,+1,+2
	
(iii)	2s, 2p
2.29	
(a)	 1s,   (b)  3p,  (c)  4d  and  (d)  4f
2.30	
(a), (c) and (e) are not possible
2.31	
(a)	 16 electrons   (b)  2 electrons
2.33	
n = 2 to n = 1
2.34	
8.72 × 10–18J per atom
2.35	
1.33 × 109
2.36	
0.06 nm
2.37	
(a)	 1.3 × 102 pm	
(b)	 6.15 × 107 pm
2.38	
1560
2.39	
8
2.40	
More number of K–particles will pass as the nucleus of the lighter atoms is small, 
smaller number of K–particles will be deflected as a number of positve charges is 
less than on the lighter nuclei. 
2.41	
For a given element the number of prontons is the same for the isotopes, whereas 
the mass number can be different for the given atomic number.
2.42	
35
81Br
2.43	
17
37
1
Cl−
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 3 :
 231
answers
2.44	
26
56
3+
Fe
2.45	
Cosmic rays  > X–rays > amber colour > microwave > FM
2.46	
3.3 × 106 J
2.47	
(a)	 4.87 × 1014 s–1	
(b)	 9.0 × 109 m	
(c)	 32.27 × 10–20 J
	
(d)	 6.2 × 1018 quanta
2.48	
10
2.49	
8.28 × 10–10 J
2.50	
3.45 × 10–22 J
2.51	
(a)	 Threshold wave length	 (b)	 Threshold frequency of radiation
	
	
652.46 nm	
	
4.598 ×1014 s–1
	
(c)	 Kinetic energy of ejected photoelectron
	
	
9.29 ×10–20 J, Velocity of photoelectron 4.516 × 105 ms–1
2.52	
530.9 nm
2.53	
4.48 eV
2.54	
7.6 × 103 eV
2.55	
infrared, 5
2.56	
434 nm
2.57	
455 pm
2.58	
494.5 ms–1
2.59	
332 pm
2.60	
1.516 × 10–38 m
2.61	
Cannot be defined as the actual magnitude is smaller than uncertainity.
2.62	
(v) < (ii) = (iv) < (vi) = (iii) < (i)
2.63	
4p
2.64	
(i)	 2s	
(ii)	 4d	
(iii)	3p
2.65	
Si
2.66	
(a)	 3	
(b)	 2	
(c)	 6
	
(d)	 4	
(e)	 zero
2.67	
16
UNIT 5
5.1	
(ii)
5.2	
(iii)
5.3	
(ii)
5.4	
(iii)
5.5	
(i)
5.6	
(iv)
5.7	
q = + 701 J
	
w = – 394 J, since work is done by the system
	
∆U =  307 J
5.8	
–743.939 kJ
5.9	
1.067 kJ
5.10	
∆H = –7.151 kJ mol–1
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 4 :
 232
chemistry
5.11	
– 314.8 kJ
5.12 
∆rH = –778 kJ
5.13	
– 46.2 kJ mol–1
5.14	
– 239 kJ mol–1
5.15	
326 kJ mol–1
5.16 
∆S > 0
5.17 
2000 K
5.18 
∆H is negative (bond energy is released) and ∆S is negative (There is less randomness 
among the molecules than among the atoms)
5.19 
0.164 kJ, the reaction is not spontaneous.
5.20 
–5.744 kJ mol–1
5.21 
NO(g) is unstable, but NO2(g) is formed.
5.22	
qsurr = + 286 kJ mol–1
 
∆Ssurr  = 959.73 J K–1 
UNIT 6
6.2 	
12.229 
6.3  
2.67 × 104
6.5  
(i) 4.33 × 10–4 (ii) 1.90
6.6  
1.59 × 10–15
6.8 	
[N2] = 0.0482 molL–1, [O2] = 0.0933 molL–1, [N2O] = 6.6 × 10–21 molL–1
6.9  
0.0352mol of NO and 0.0178mol of Br2
6.10  
7.47 × 1011 M–1
6.11  
4.0
6.12 	
Qc = 2.379 × 103. No, reaction is not at equilibrium.
6.14  
0.44
6.15  
0.068 molL–1 each of H2 and I2
6.16  
[I2] = [Cl2] = 0.167 M, [ICl] = 0.446 M
6.17 	
[C2H6]eq = 3.62 atm
6.18  
(i) [CH3COOC2H5][H2O] / [CH3COOH][C2H5OH]
	
(ii) 3.92  (iii) value of Qc is less than Kc therefore equilibrium is not attained.
6.19  
0.02molL–1 for both.
6.20  
[PCO] = 1.739atm, [PCO2] = 0.461atm.
6.21  
No, the reaction proceeds to form more products.
6.22  
3 × 10–4 molL–1
6.23  
0.149
6.24  
a) – 35.0kJ, b) 1.365 × 106
6.27  
[PH2]eq = [PBr2]eq = 2.5 × 10–2bar, [PHBr] = 10.0 bar
6.30  
b) 120.48
6.31  
[H2]eq = 0.96 bar
6.33  
2.86 × 10–28 M
6.34  
5.85x10–2
6.35 	
NO2
–, HCN, ClO4, HF, H2O, HCO3
–, HS–
6.36  
BF3, H+, NH4
+
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 5 :
 233
answers
6.37 	
F–, HSO4
–, CO3
2–
6.38 	
NH3, NH4
+, HCOOH
6.41 	
2.42
6.42 	
1.7 x 10–4M
6.43 	
F–= 1.5 x 10–11, HCOO–= 5.6 × 10–11, CN–= 2.08 x 10–6
6.44 	
[phenolate ion]= 2.2 × 10–6, α = 4.47 × 10–5 , α in sodium phenolate = 10–8
6.45 	
[HS–]= 9.54 x 10–5, in 0.1M HCl [HS–] = 9.1 × 10–8M, [S2–] = 1.2 × 10–13M, in 0.1M 
HCl [S2–]= 1.09 × 10–19M
6.46 	
[Ac–]= 0.00093, pH= 3.03
6.47 	
[A–] = 7.08 x10–5M, Ka= 5.08 × 10–7, pKa= 6.29
6.48 	
a) 2.52 b) 11.70 c) 2.70 d) 11.30
6.49 	
a) 11.65 b) 12.21 c) 12.57 c) 1.87
6.50 	
pH = 1.88, pKa = 2.70
6.51 	
Kb = 1.6 × 10–6, pKb = 5.8
6.52 	
α = 6.53 × 10–4, Ka = 2.35 × 10–5
6.53 	
a) 0.0018 b) 0.00018
6.54 	
α = 0.0054
6.55 	
a) 1.48 × 10–7M,    b) 0.063     c) 4.17 × 10–8M     d) 3.98 × 10–7
6.56 	
a) 1.5 × 10–7M,      b) 10–5M,    c) 6.31 × 10–5M     d) 6.31 × 10–3M
6.57 	
[K+] = [OH–] = 0.05M, [H+] = 2.0 × 10–13M
6.58 	
[Sr2+] = 0.1581M, [OH–] = 0.3162M, pH = 13.50
6.59 	
α = 1.63 × 10–2, pH = 3.09. In presence of 0.01M HCl, α = 1.32 × 10–3
6.60 	
Ka = 2.09 × 10–4 and degree of ionization = 0.0457
6.61 	
pH = 7.97. Degree of hydrolysis = 2.36 × 10–5 
6.62 	
Kb = 1.5 × 10–9
6.63 	
NaCl, KBr solutions are neutral, NaCN, NaNO2 and KF solutions are basic and 
NH4NO3 solution is acidic.
6.64 	
(a) pH of acid solution= 1.9	
	
(b) pH of its salt solution= 7.9
6.65 	
pH = 6.78
6.66 	
a) 12.6    b) 7.00    c) 1.3
6.67 	
Silver chromate S= 0.65 × 10–4M; Molarity of Ag+ = 1.30 x 10–4M
	
Molarity of CrO4
2– = 0.65 × 10–4M; Barium Chromate S = 1.1 × 10–5M; Molarity of 
Ba2+ and CrO4
2– each is 1.1 × 10–5M; Ferric Hydroxide S = 1.39 × 10–10M; 
	
Molarity of Fe3+ = 1.39 × 10–10M; Molarity of [OH–] = 4.17 × 10–10M
	
Lead Chloride S = 1.59 × 10–2M; Molarity of Pb2+ = 1.59 × 10–2M
	
Molarity of Cl– = 3.18 × 10–2M; Mercurous Iodide S = 2.24 × 10–10M;
	
Molarity of Hg2
2+ = 2.24 × 10–10M and molarity of I– = 4.48 × 10–10M
6.68 	
Silver chromate is more soluble and the ratio of their molarities = 91.9
6.69 	
No precipitate
6.70 	
Silver benzoate is 3.317 times more soluble at lower pH
6.71 	
The highest molarity for the solution is 2.5 × 10–9M
6.72 	
2.43 litre of water
6.73 	
Precipitation will take place in cadmium chloride solution
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 6 :
 Notes
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 7 :
 Logarithms
N	
0	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	
10	
0000	 0043	
0086	
0128	
0170	
	
	
	
	
	
5	
9	
13	
17	
21	 26	
30	
34	38
		
	
	
	
	
	
0212	
0253	 0294	 0334	 0374	
4	
  8	
12	
16	
2O	 24	
28	
32	36
11	
0414	0453	
0492	
0531	
0569	
	
	
	
	
	
4	
 8	
12	
16	
20	 23	
27	
31	35
		
	
	
	
	
	
0607	
0645	 0682	 0719	 0755	
4	
7	
11	
15	
18	 22	
26	
29	33
12	
0792	0828	
0864	
0899	
0934	
	
	
	
	
	
3	
7	
11	
14	
18	 21	
25	
28	32
		
	
	
	
	
	
0969	
1004	 1038	 1072	 1106	
3	
7	
10	
14	
17	 20	
24	
27	31
13	
1139	1173	
1206	
1239	
1271	
	
	
	
	
	
3	
6	
10	
13	
16	 19	
23	
26	29
		
	
	
	
	
	
1303	
1335	 1367	 1399	 1430	
3	
7	
10	
13	
16	 19	
22	
25	29
14	
1461	1492	
1523	
1553	
1584	
	
	
	
	
	
3	
6	
9	
12	
15	 19	
22	
25	28
		
	
	
	
	
	
1614	
1644	 1673	 1703	 1732	
3	
6	
9	
12	
14	 17	
20	
23	26
	15	
1761	1790	
1818	
1847	
1875	
	
	
	
	
	
3	
6	
9	
11	
14	 17	
20	
23	26
		
	
	
	
	
	
1903	
1931	 1959	 1987	 2014	
3	
6	
8	
11	
14	 17	
19	
22	25
16	
2041	2068	
2095	
2122	
2148	
	
	
	
	
	
3	
6	
8	
11	
14	  16	
19	
22	24
		
	
	
	
	
	
2175	
2201	 2227	 2253	 2279	
3	
5	
8	
10	
 13	 16	
18	
21	23
17	
2304	2330	
2355	
2380	
2405	
	
	
	
	
	
3	
5	
8	
10	
13	 15	
18	
20	23
		
	
	
	
	
	
2430	
2455	 2480	 2504	 2529	
3	
5	
8	
10	
12	 15	
17	
20	22 
18	
2553	2577	
2601	
2625	
2648	
	
	
	
	
	
2	
5	
7	
9	
12	 14	
17	
19	21
		
	
	
	
	
	
2672	
2695	 2718	 2742	 2765	
2	
4	
7	
9	
 11	 14	
16	
18	21
19	
2788	2810	
2833	
2856	
2878	
	
	
	
	
	
2	
4	
7	
9	
11	 13	
16	
18	20
		
	
	
	
	
	
2900	
2923	 2945	 2967	 2989	
2	
4	
6	
8	
11	 13	
15	
17	19
20	
3010	3032	
3054	
3075	
3096	
3118	
3139	 3160	 3181	 3201	
2	
4	
6	
8	
11	 13	
15	
17	19
21	
3222	3243	
3263	
3284	
3304	
3324	
3345	 3365	 3385	 3404	
2	
4	
6	
8	
10	 12	
14	
16	18
22	
3424	3444	
3464	
3483	
3502	
3522	
3541	 3560	 3579	 3598	
2	
4	
6	
8	
10	 12	
14	
15	17
23	
3617	3636	
3655	
3674	
3692	
3711	
3729	 3747	 3766	 3784	
2	
4	
6	
7	
9	
11	
13	
15	17
24	
3802	3820	
3838	
3856	
3874	
3892	
3909	 3927	 3945	 3962	
2	
4	
5	
7	
9	
11	
12	
14	16
25	
3979	3997	
4014	
4031	
4048	
4065	
4082	 4099	 4116	 4133	
2	
3	
5	
7	
9	
10	
12	
14	15
26	
4150	4166	
4183	
4200	
4216	
4232	
4249	 4265	 4281	 4298	
2	
3	
5	
7	
8	
10	
11	
13	15
27	
4314	4330	
4346	
4362	
4378	
4393	
4409	 4425	 4440	 4456	
2	
3	
5	
6	
8	
9	
11	
13	14
28	
4472	4487	
4502	
4518	
4533	
4548	
4564	 4579	 4594	 4609	
2	
3	
5	
6	
8	
9	
11	
12	14
29	
4624	4639	
4654	
4669	
4683	
4698	
4713	 4728	 4742	 4757	
1	
3	
4	
6	
7	
9	
10	
12	13
30	
4771	4786	
4800	
4814	
4829	
4843	
4857	 4871	 4886	 4900	
1	
3	
4	
6	
7	
9	
10	
11	13
31	
4914	4928	
 4942	 4955	
4969	
4983	
4997	 5011	 5024	 5038	
1	
3	
 4	
6	
7	
8	
10	
11	12
32	
5051	5065	
5079	
5092	
5105	
5119	
5132	 5145	 5159	 5172	
1	
3	
4	
5	
7	
8	
9	
11	12
33	
5185	5198	
5211	
5224	
5237	
5250	
5263	 5276	 5289	 5302	
1	
3	
4	
5	
6	
8	
9	
10	12
34	
5315	5328	
5340	
5353	
5366	
5378	
5391	 5403	 5416	 5428	
1	
3	
4	
5	
6	
8	
9	
10	11
35	
5441	5453	
5465	
5478	
5490	
5502	
5514	 5527	 5539	 5551	
1	
2	
4	
5	
6	
7	
9	
10	11
36	
5563	5575	
5587	
5599	
5611	
5623	
5635	 5647	 5658	 5670	
1	
2	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
10	11
37	
5682	5694	
5705	
5717	
5729	
5740	
5752	 5763	 5775	 5786	
1	
2	
3	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	 10
38	
5798	5809	
5821	
5832	
5843	
5855	
5866	 5877	 5888	 5899	
1	
2	
3	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	 10
39	
5911	5922	
5933	
5944	
5955	
5966	
5977	 5988	 5999	 6010	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
7	
8	
9	 10
40	
6021	6031	
6042	
6053	
6064	
6075	
6085	 6096	 6107	 6117	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
8	
9	 10
41	
6128	6138	
6149	
6160	
6170	
6180	
6191	 6201	 6212	 6222	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
42	
6232	6243	
6253	
6263	
6274	
6284	
6294	 6304	 6314	 6325	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
43	
6335	6345	
6355	
6365	
6375	
6385	
6395	 6405	 6415	 6425	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
44	
6435	6444	
6454	
6464	
6474	
6484	
6493	 6503	 6513	 6522	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
45	
6532	6542	
6551	
6561	
6471	
6580	
6590	 6599	 6609	 6618	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
46	
6628	6637	
6646	
6656	
6665	
6675	
6684	 6693	 6702	 6712	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
7	
8
47	
6721	6730	
6739	
6749	
6758	
6767	
6776	 6785	 6794	 6803	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6	
7	
8
48	
6812	6821	
6830	
6839	
6848	
6857	
6866	 6875	 6884	 6893	
1	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8
49	
6902	6911	
6920	
6928	
6937	
6946	
6955	 6964	 6972	 6981	
1	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8
Table I
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 8 :
 Logarithms
Table 1 (Continued)	
N	
0	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
50	
6990	 6998	
7007	
7016	
7024	
7033	
7042 	7050	 7059	 7067	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
51	
7076	 7084	
7093	
7101	
7110	
7118	
7126	 7135	 7143	 7152	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8
52	
7160	 7168	
7177	
7185	
7193	
7202	
7210	 7218	 7226	 7235	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
7
53	
7243	 7251	
7259	
7267	
7275	
7284	
7292	 7300	 7308	 7316	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
6	
7
54	
7324	 7332	
7340	
7348	
7356	
7364	
7372	 7380	 7388	 7396	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
6	
7
55	
7404	 7412	
7419	
7427	
7435	
7443	
7451	 7459	 7466	 7474	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6	
7
56	
7482	 7490	
7497	
7505	
7513	
7520	
7528	 7536	 7543	 7551	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6	
7
57	
7559	 7566	
7574	
7582	
7589	
7597	
7604	 7612	 7619	 7627	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6	
7
58	
7634	 7642	
7649	
7657	
7664	
7672	
7679	 7686	 7694	 7701	
1	
1	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
6	
7
59	
7709	 7716	
7723	
7731	
7738	
7745	
7752	 7760	 7767	 7774	
1	
1	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
6	
7
60	
7782	 7789	
7796	
7803	
7810	
7818	
7825	 7832	 7839	 7846	
1	
1	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
6	
6
61	
7853	 7860	
7768	
7875	
7882	
7889	
7896	 7903	 7910	 7917	
1	
1	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
6	
 6
62	
7924	 7931	
7938	
7945	
7952	
7959	
7966	 7973	 7980	 7987	
1	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
6	
6
63	
7993	 8000	
8007	
8014	
8021	
8028	
8035	 8041	 8048	 8055	
1	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6
64	
8062	 8069	
8075	
8082	
8089	
8096	
8102	 8109	 8116	 8122	
1	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6
65	
8129	 8136	
8142	
8149	
8156	
8162	
8169	 8176	 8182	 8189	
1	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6
66	
8195	 8202	
8209	
8215	
8222	
8228	
8235	 8241	 8248	 8254	
1	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6
67	
8261	 8267	
8274	
8280	
8287	
8293	
8299	 8306	 8312	 8319	
1	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6
68	
8325	 8331	
8338	
8344	
8351	
8357	
8363	 8370	 8376	 8382	
1	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5	
6
69	
8388	 8395	
8401	
8407	
8414	
8420	
8426	 8432	 8439	 8445	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
6
70	
8451	 8457	
8463	
8470	
8476	
8482	
8488	 8494	 8500	 8506	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
6
71	
8513	 8519	
8525	
8531	
8537	
8543	
8549	 8555	 8561	 8567	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
5
72	
8573	 8579	
8585	
 8591	 8597	
8603	
8609	 8615	 8621	 8627	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
5
73	
8633	 8639	
8645	
8651	
8657	
8663	
8669	 8675	 8681	 8686	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
5
74	
8692	 8698	
8704	
8710	
8716	
8722	
8727	 8733	 8739	 8745	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
5
75	
8751	 8756	
8762	
8768	
8774	
8779	
8785	 8791	 8797	 8802	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
5
76	
8808	 8814	
8820	
8825	
8831	
8837	
8842	 8848	 8854	 8859	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
5
77	
8865	 8871	
8876	
8882	
8887	
8893	
8899	 8904	 8910	 8915	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
78	
8921	 8927	
8932	
8938	
8943	
8949	
8954	 8960	 8965	 8971	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
79	
8976	 8982	
8987	
8993	
8998	
9004	
9009	 9015	 9020 	 9025	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
80	
9031	 9036	
9042	
9047	
9053	
9058	
9063	 9069	 9074	 9079	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
81	
9085	 9090	
9096	
9101	
9106	
9112	
9117	 9122	 9128	 9133	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
82	
9138	 9143	
9149	
9154	
9159	
9165	
9170	 9175	 9180	 9186	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
83	
9191	 9196	
9201	
9206	
9212	
9217	
9222	 9227	 9232	 9238	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
84	
9243	 9248	
9253	
9258	
9263	
9269	
9274	 9279	 9284	 9289	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
85	
9294	 9299	
9304	
9309	
9315	
9320	
9325	 9330	 9335	 9340	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
86	
9345	 9350	
9355	
9360	
9365	
9370	
9375	 9380	 9385	 9390	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
87	
9395	 9400	
9405	
9410	
9415	
9420	
9425	 9430	 9435	 9440	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
88	
9445	 9450	
9455	
9460	
9465	
9469	
9474	 9479	 9484	 9489	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
89	
9494	 9499	
9504	
9509	
9513	
9518	
9523	 9528	 9533	 9538	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
90	
9542	 9547	
9552	
9557	
9562	
9566	
9571	 9576	 9581	 9586	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
91	
9590	 9595	
9600	
9605	
9609	
9614	
9619	 9624	 9628	 9633	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
92	
9638	 9643	
9647	
9652	
9657	
9661	
9666	 9671	 9675	 9680	
0	
1	
 1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
93	
9685	 9689	
9694	
9699	
9703	
9708	
9713	 9717	 9722	 9727	
0	
1	
 1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
94	
9731	  9736	 9741	
9745	
9750	
9754	
9759	 9763	 9768	 9773	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
95	
9777	 9782	
9786	
9791	
9795	
9800	
9805	 9809	 9814	 9818	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
96	
9823	 9827	
9832	
9836	
9841	
9845	
9850	 9854	 9859	 9863	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
97	
9868	 9872	
9877	
9881	
9886	
9890	
9894	 9899	 9903 	 9908	
0 	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
98	
9912	 9917	
9921	
9926	
9930	
9934 	 9939	 9943	 9948	 9952	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
99	
9956	 9961	
9965	
9969	
9974	
9978	
9983	 9987	 9997	 9996	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
3	
4
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 9 :
 AntiLogarithms
N	
0	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
00	
1000	 1002	
1005	
1007	
1009	
1012	
1014	 1016	 1019	 1021	
0	
0	
1	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2
.01	
1023	 1026	
1028	
1030	
1033	
1035	
1038	 1040	 1042	 1045	
0	
0	
1	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2
.02	
1047	 1050	
1052	
1054	
1057	
1059	
1062	 1064	 1067	 1069	
0	
 0	
1	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2
.03	
1072	 1074	
1076	
1079	
1081	
1084	
1086	 1089	 1091	 1094	
0	
0	
1	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2
.04	
1096	 1099	
1102	
1104	
1107	
1109	
1112	 1114	 1117	 1119	
0	
1	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
2
.05	
1122	 1125	
1127	
1130	
1132	
1135	
1138	 1140	 1143	 1146	
0	
1	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
2
.06	
1148	 1151	
1153	
1156	
1159	
1161	
1164	 1167	 1169	 1172	
0	
1	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
2
.07	
1175	 1178	
1180	
1183	
1186	
1189	
1191	 1194	 1197	 1199	
0	
1	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
2
.08	
1202	 1205	
1208	
1211	
1213	
1216	
1219	 1222	 1225	 1227	
0	
1	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
3
.09	
1230	 1233	
1236	
1239	
1242	
1245	
1247	 1250	 1253	 1256	
0	
1	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
3
.10	
1259	 1262	
1265	
1268	
1271	
1274	
1276	 1279	 1282	 1285	
0	
1	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
3
.11	
1288	 1291	
1294	
1297	
1300	
1303	
1306	 1309	 1312	 1315	
0	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
2	
3
.12	
1318	 1321	
1324	
1327	
1330	
1334	
1337	 1340	 1343	 1346	
0	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
2	
3
.13	
1349	 1352	
1355	
1358	
1361	
1365	
1368	 1371	 1374	 1377	
0	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
3	
3
.14	
1380	 1384	
1387	
1390	
1393	
1396	
1400	 1403	 1406	 1409	
0	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
3	
3
.15	
1413	 1416	
1419	
1422	
1426	
1429	
1432	 1435	 1439	 1442	
0	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
3	
3
.16	
1445	 1449	
1452	
1455	
1459	
1462	
1466	 1469	 1472	 1476	
0	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
3	
3
.17	
1479	 1483	
1486	
1489	
1493	
1496	
1500	 1503	 1507	 1510	
0	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
3	
3
.18	
1514	 1517	
1521	
1524	
1528	
1531	
1535	 1538	 1542	 1545	
0	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
3	
3
.19	
1549	 1552	
1556	
1560	
1563	
1567	
1570	 1574	 1578	 1581	
0	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
3
.20	
1585	 1589	
1592	
1596	
1600	
1603	
1607	 1611	 1614	 1618	
0	
1	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
3
.21	
1622	 1626	
1629	
1633	
1637	
1641	
1644	 1648	 1652	 1656	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
3	
3	
3
.22	
1660	 1663	
1667	
1671	
1675	
1679	
1683	 1687	 1690	 1694	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
3	
3	
3
.23	
1698	 1702	
1706	
1710	
1714	
1718	
1722	 1726	 1730	 1734	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4
.24	
1738	 1742	
1746	
1750	
1754	
1758	
1762	 1766	 1770	 1774	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4
	.25	 1778	 1782	
1786	
1791	
1795	
1799	
1803	 1807	 1811	 1816	
0	
1	
 1	
2	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4
	.26	 1820	 1824	
1828	
1832	
1837	
1841	
1845	 1849	 1854	 1858	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
3	
4
	.27	 1862	 1866	
1871	
1875	
1879	
1884	
1888	 1892	 1897	 1901	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
3	
4
	.28	 1905	 1910	
1914	
1919	
1923	
1928	
1932	 1936	 1941	 1945	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
	.29	 1950	 1954	
1959	
1963	
1968	
1972	
1977	 1982	 1986	 1991	
0	
1 	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
	.30	 1995	 2000	
2004	
2009	
2014	
2018	
2023	 2028	 2032	 2037	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
	.31	 2042	 2046	
2051	
2056	
2061	
2065	
2070	 2075	 2080	 2084	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
	.32	 2089	 2094	
2099	
2104	
2109	
2113	
2118	 2123	 2128	 2133	
0	
1	
 1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
	.33	 2138	 2143	
2148	
2153	
2158	
2163	
2168	 2173	 2178	 2183	
0	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4
	.34	 2188	 2193	
2198	
2203	
2208	
2213	
2218	 2223	 2228	 2234	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
	.35	 2239	 2244	
2249	
2254	
2259	
2265	
2270	 2275	 2280	 2286	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
	.36	 2291	 2296	
2301	
2307	
2312	
2317	
2323	 2328	 2333	 2339	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
	.37	 2344	 2350	
2355	
2360	
2366	
2371	
2377	 2382	 2388	 2393	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
	.38	 2399	 2404	
2410	
2415	
2421	
2427	
2432	 2438	 2443	 2449	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5
	.39	 2455	 2460	
2466	
2472	
2477	
2483	
2489	 2495	 2500	 2506	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3      	
3	
4	
5	
5	
	.40	 2512	 2518	
2523	
2529	
2535	
2541	
2547	 2553	 2559	 2564	
1	
 1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
5
	.41	 2570	 2576	
2582	
2588	
2594	
2600	
2606	 2612	 2618	 2624	
1	
 1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
4	
 5	  5
	.42	 2630	 2636	
2642	
2649	
2655	
2661	
2667	 2673	 2679	 2685	
1	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
 4 	
5	
6
	.43	 2692	 2698	
2704	
2710	
2716	
2723	
2729	 2735	 2742	 2748	
1	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5	
6
	.44	 2754	 2761	
2767	
2773	
2780	
2786	
2793	 2799	 2805	 2812	
1	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
4	
5	
6
	.45	 2818	 2825	
2831	
2838	
2844	
2851	
2858	 2864	 2871	 2877	
1	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6
	.46	 2884	 2891	
2897	
2904	
2911	
2917	
2924	 2931	 2938	 2944	
1	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6		
.47	
2951	 2958	
2965	
2972	
2979	
2985	
2992	 2999	 3006	 3013	
1	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6
	.48	 3020	 3027	
3034	
3041	
3048	
3055	
3062	 3069	 3076	 3083	
1	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5 	
6	
6
	.49	 3090	 3097	
3105	
3112	
3119	
3126	
3133	 3141	 3148	 3155	
1	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
6	
6
Table II
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 10 :
 Table II (Continued)	
N	
0	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
	.50	 3162	 3170	
3177	
3184	
3192	
3199	
3206	 3214	 3221	 3228	
1	
1	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
6	
7
	.51	 3236	 3243	
3251	
3258	
3266	
3273	
3281	 3289	 3296	 3304	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6	
7
	.52	 3311	 3319	
3327	
3334	
3342	
3350	
3357	 3365	 3373	 3381	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6	
7
	.53	 3388	 3396	
3404	
3412	
3420	
3428	
3436	 3443	 3451	 3459	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
6	
7
	.54	 3467	 3475	
3483	
3491	
3499	
3508	
3516	 3524	 3532	 3540	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
6	
7
	.55	 3548	 3556	
3565	
3573	
3581	
3589	
3597	 3606	 3614	 3622	
1	
2	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
7
	.56	 3631	 3639	
3648	
3656	
3664	
3673	
3681	 3690	 3698	 3707	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
	.57	 3715	 3724	
3733	
3741	
3750	
3758	
3767	 3776	 3784	 3793	
1	
2	
3	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8
	.58	 3802	 3811	
3819	
3828	
3837	
3846	
3855	 3864	 3873	 3882	
1	
2	
3	
4	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8
	.59	 3890	 3899	
3908	
3917	
3926	
3936	
3945	 3954	 3963	 3972	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6	
7	
8
	.60	 3981	 3990	
3999	
4009	
4018	
4027	
4036	 4046	 4055	 4064	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
6	
7	
8
	.61	 4074	 4083	
4093	
4102	
4111	
4121	
4130	 4140	 4150	 4159	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
	.62	 4169	 4178	
4188	
4198	
4207	
4217	
4227	 4236	 4246	 42S6	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
	.63	 4266	 4276	
4285	
4295	
4305	
4315	
4325	 4335	 4345	 4355	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
	.64	 4365	 4375	
4385	
4395	
4406	
4416	
4426	 4436	 4446	 4457	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
	.65	 4467	 4477	
4487	
4498	
4508	
4519	
4529	 4539	 4550	 4560	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
	.66	 4571	 4581	
4592	
4603	
4613	
4624	
4634	 4645	 4656	 4667	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
9	 10
	.67	 4677	 4688	
4699	
4710	
4721	
4732	
4742	 4753	 4764	 4775	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
7	
8	
9	 10
	.68	 4786	 4797	
4808	
4819	
4831	
4842	
4853	 4864	 4875	 4887	
1	
2	
3	
4	
6	
7	
8	
9	 10
	.69	 4898	 4909	
4920	
4932	
4943	
4955	
4966	 4977	 4989	 5000	
1	
2	
3	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	 10
	.70	 5012	 5023	
5035	
5047	
5058	
5070	
5082	 5093	 5105	 5117	
1	
2	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9	 11
	.71	 5129	 5140	
5152	
5164	
5176	
5188	
5200	 5212	 5224	 5236	
1	
2	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
10	11
	.72   5248	 5260	
5272	
5284	
5297	
5309	
5321	 5333	 5346	 5358	
1	
2	
4	
5	
6	
7	
9	
10	11
	.73   5370	 5383	
5395	
5408	
5420	
5433	
5445	 5458	 5470	 5483	
1	
3	
4	
5	
6	
8	
9	
10	11
	.74	 5495	 5508	
5521	
5534	
5546	
5559	
5572	 5585	 5598	 5610	
1	
3	
4	
5	
6	
8	
9	
10	12
	.75	 5623	 5636	
5649	
5662	
5675	
5689	
5702	 5715	 5728	 5741	
1	
3	
4	
5	
7	
8	
9	
10	12
	.76	 5754	 5768	
5781	
5794	
5808	
5821	
5834	 5848	 5861	 5875	
1	
3	
4	
5	
7	
8	
9	
11	12
	.77	 5888	 5902	
5916	
5929	
5943	
5957	
5970	 5984	 5998	 6012	
1	
3	
4	
5	
7	
8	
10	
11	12
	.78  6026	
6039	
6053	
6067	
6081	
6095	
6109	 6124	 6138	 6152	
1	
3	
4	
6	
7	
8	
10	
11	13
	.79	 6166 	6180	
6194	
6209	
6223	
6237	
6252	 6266	 6281	 6295	
1	
3	
4	
6	
7	
9	
10	
11	13
	.80	 6310 	6324	
6339	
6353	
6368	
6383	
6397	 6412	 6427	 6442	
1	
3	
4	
6	
7	
9	
10	
12	13
	.81	 6457	 6471	
6486	
6501	
6516	
6531	
6546	 6561	 6577	 6592	
2	
3	
5	
6	
8	
9	
11	
12	14
	.82	 6607	 6622	
6637	
6653	
6668	
6683	
6699	 6714	 6730	 6745	
2	
3	
5	
6	
8	
9	
11	
12	14
	.83	 6761	 6776	
6792	
6808	
6823	
6839	
6855	 6871	 6887	 6902	
2	
3	
5	
6	
8	
9	
11	
 13	14
	.84	 6918	 6934	
6950	
6966	
6982	
6998	
7015	 7031	 7047	 7063	
2	
3	
5	
6	
8	
10	
11	
13	15
	.85	 7079	 7096	
7112	
7129	
7145	
7161	
7178	 7194	 7211	 7228	
2	
3	
5	
7	
8	
10	
12	
13	15
	.86	 7244	 7261	
7278	
7295	
7311	
7328	
7345	 7362	 7379	 7396	
2	
3	
5	
7	
8	
10	
12	
13	15
	.87	 7413	 7430	
7447	
7464	
7482	
7499	
7516	 7534	 7551	 7568	
2	
3	
5	
7	
9	
10	
12	
14	16
	.88	 7586	 7603	
7621	
7638	
7656	
7674	
7691	 7709	 7727	 7745	
2	
4	
5	
7	
9	
11	
12	
14	16
	.89	 7762	 7780	
7798	
7816	
7834	
7852	
7870	 7889	 7907	 7925	
2	
4	
5	
7	
9	
11	
13	
14	16
	.90	 7943	 7962	
7980	
7998	
8017	
8035	
8054	 8072	 8091	 8110	
2	
4	
6	
7        9	
11	
13	
15	17
	.91	 8128	 8147	
8166	
8185	
8204	
8222	
8241	 8260	 8279	 8299	
2	
4	
6	
8	
9	
11	
13	
15	17		
.92	
8318	 8337	
8356	
8375	
8395	
8414	
8433	 8453	 8472	 8492	
2	
4	
6	
8	
10	 12	
14	
15	17
	.93	 8511	 8531	
8551	
8570	
8590	
8610	
8630	 8650	 8670	 8690	
2	
4	
6	
8	
10	 12	
14	
16	18		
.94	
8710	 8730	
8750	
8770	
8790	
8810	
8831	 8851	 8872	 8892	
2	
4	
6	
8	
10	 12	
14	
16	18
	.95	 8913	 8933	
8954	
8974	
8995	
9016	
9036	 9057	 9078	 9099	
2	
4	
6	
8	
10	 12	
15	
17	19	
.96	
9120	 9141	
9162	
9183	
9204	
9226	
9247	 9268	 9290	 9311	
2	
4	
6	
8	
11	 13	
15	
17	19
.97	
9333	 9354	
9376	
9397	
9419	
9441	
9462	 9484	 9506	 9528	
2	
4	
7	
9	
11	 13	
15	
17	20
	.98	 9550	 9572	
9594	
9616	
9638	
9661	
9683	 9705	 9727	 9750	
2	
4	
7	
9	
11	 13	
16	
18	20
	.99	 9772	 9795	
9817	
9840	
9863	
9886	
9908	 9931	 9954	 9977	
2	
5	
7	
9	
11	 14	
16	
18	20
AntiLogarithms
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 11 :
 Notes
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 12 :
 Notes
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 1 :
 Chemistry 
Part I
Textbook for Class XI
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 2 :
 2
CHEMISTRY
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, 
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the 
publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent, 
re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in 
any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page. Any revised 
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is 
incorrect and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION 
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016 
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road 
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan 
Ahmedabad 380 014 
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon  
Guwahati 781 021 
Phone :  0361-2674869 
Publication Team
Head, Publication 
: Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Editor 
: Shveta Uppal
Chief Production 
: Arun Chitkara
Ofﬁ cer
Chief Business 
: Amitabh Kumar
Manager (In charge)
Editor 
: Benoy Banerjee
Assistant Production  
: Om Prakash
Officer
Cover
Shweta Rao
Illustrations
Nidhi Wadhwa
Anil Nayal
First Edition 
 
 
 
March 2006 
Phalguna 1927
Reprinted 
   
October 2006 
Kartika 1928
November 2007 
Kartika 1929
January 2009 
Magha 1930
December 2009 
Pausa 1931
November 2010 
Kartika 1932 
January 2012 
Pausha 1933
November 2012 
Kartika 1934 
November 2013 
Kartika 1935
December 2014 
Pausa 1936
May 2016 
Vaishakha 1938
January 2018 
Magha 1939
December 2018 
Agrahayana 1940
October 2019 
Ashwina 1941
July 2021 
Asadha 1943
August 2022 
Bhadrapada 1944
Revised Edition    
October 2022 
Ashwina 1944
Reprinted 
   
March 2024 
Chaitra 1946
PD 370T SU
© National Council of Educational 
Research and Training, 2006, 2022
` 230.00
11082 – CHEMISTRY PART I
Textbook for Class XI
ISBN  81-7450-494-X (Part I)
81-7450-535-0 (Part II)
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT 
watermark
Published at the Publication Division 
by the Secretary, National Council of 
Educational Research and Training, 
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016 
and printed at Laxmi Offset Printers, G- 115, 
Heerawala Industrial Area, Kanota, Agra 
Road, Jaipur 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 3 :
 3
answerS
Foreword
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005 recommends that children’s 
life at school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks 
a departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our 
system and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi 
and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this 
basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of 
sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will 
take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of education 
outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986). 
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and 
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to 
pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space, 
time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information 
passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of 
examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning 
are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat 
children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning. 
Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the 
annual calender so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted 
to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how 
effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, 
rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address 
the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at 
different stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available 
for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher 
priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion 
in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates 
the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this 
book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in science and 
mathematics, Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book, Professor B. 
L. Khandelwal for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed 
to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making 
this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have 
generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel. As 
an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the 
quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will 
enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi	
National Council of Educational 
20 December 2005	
Research and Training
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 4 :
 4
chemistry
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 5 :
 5
answerS
Rationalisation of Content in the Textbooks
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce 
content load on students. The National Education Policy 2020, also 
emphasises reducing the content load and providing opportunities 
for experiential learning with creative mindset. In this background, 
the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to rationalise the textbooks 
across all classes. Learning Outcomes already developed by the 
NCERT across classes have been taken into consideration in this 
exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the 
following:
•	 Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas 
in the same class
•	 Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same 
subject
•	 Difficulty level
•	 Content, which is easily accessible to students without much 
interventions from teachers and can be learned by children through 
self-learning or peer-learning
•	 Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes 
given above.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 6 :
 6
chemistry
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 7 :
 7
answerS
Textbook Development Committee
Chairperson, Advisory Group for Textbooks in Science and Mathematics
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Chairman,  Advisory Committee, Inter 
University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCCA), Ganeshbhind,  
Pune University, Pune
Chief Advisor
B.L. Khandelwal, Professor (Retd.), Emeritus Scientist, CSIR; Emeritus Fellow, AICTE 
and formerly Chairman, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology,  
New Delhi
Members
A. S. Brar, Professor, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
Anjni Koul, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
H.O. Gupta, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
I.P. Aggarwal, Professor, Regional Institute of Education, Bhopal
Jaishree Sharma, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
M. Chandra, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Poonam Sawhney, PGT (Chemistry), Kendriya Vidyalaya, Vikas Puri, New Delhi
R.K. Parashar, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
S.K. Dogra, Professor, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical Research, University 
of Delhi, Delhi
S.K. Gupta, Reader, School of Studies in Chemistry, Jiwaji University, Gwalior
Sadhna Bhargava, PGT (Chemistry), Sardar Patel Vidyalaya, Lodhi Estate, New Delhi
Shubha Keshwan, Headmistress, Demonstration School, Regional Institute of 
Education, Mysuru
Sukhvir Singh, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Sunita Malhotra, Professor, School of Sciences, IGNOU, Maidan Garhi, New Delhi
V.K. Verma, Professor (Retd.), Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi
V.P. Gupta, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, Bhopal
Member-Coordinator
Alka Mehrotra, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 8 :
 8
chemistry
Acknowledgements
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges the 
valuable contributions of the individuals and organisations involved in the 
development of Chemistry textbook for Class XI. It also acknowledges that some 
useful material from the reprint editions (2005) of Chemistry textbooks has been 
utilised in the development of the present textbook.
The following academics contributed effectively in editing, reviewing, refining and 
finalisation of the manuscript of this book: G.T. Bhandage, Professor,  RIE, Mysuru; 
N. Ram, Professor, IIT, New Delhi; Sanjeev Kumar, Associate Professor, School 
of Science, IGNOU, Maidan Garhi, New Delhi; Shampa Bhattacharya, Associate 
Professor, Hans Raj College, Delhi; Vijay Sarda, Associate Professor (Retd.), Zakir 
Husain College, New Delhi; K.K. Arora, Associate Professor, Zakir Husain College, 
New Delhi; Shashi Saxena, Associate Professor, Hans Raj College, Delhi; Anuradha 
Sen, Apeejay School, Sheikh Sarai, New Delhi; C. Shrinivas, PGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya, 
Pushp Vihar, New Delhi; D.L. Bharti, PGT, Ramjas School, Sector IV, R.K. Puram, 
New Delhi; Ila Sharma, PGT, Delhi Public School, Dwarka, Sector-B, New Delhi; Raj 
Lakshmi Karthikeyan, Head (Science), Mother’s International School, Sri Aurobindo 
Marg, New Delhi; Sushma Kiran Setia, Principal, Sarvodaya Kanya Vidyalaya, Hari 
Nagar (CT), New Delhi; Nidhi Chaudray, PGT, CRPF Public School, Rohini, Delhi; 
and Veena Suri, PGT, Bluebells School, Kailash Colony, New Delhi. We are thankful 
to them.
We express our gratitude to R.S. Sindhu, Professor (Retd.), DESM, NCERT, New 
Delhi, for editing and refining the content of the textbook right from the initial stage.
We are also grateful to Ruchi Verma, Associate Professor, DESM, NCERT, New 
Delhi; Pramila Tanwar, Associate Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi; R.B. Pareek, 
Associate Professor, RIE, Ajmer; and A.K. Arya, Associate Professor, RIE, Ajmer, for 
refining the content of the textbook.
Special thanks are due to M. Chandra, Professor and Head (Retd.), DESM, 
NCERT for her support.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contributions of Surendra Kumar, 
Narender Verma and Ramesh Kumar, DTP Operators; Subhash Saluja, Ramendra 
Kumar Sharma and Abhimanyu Mohanty, Proofreaders; Bhavna Saxena, Copy 
Editor; and Deepak Kapoor, In-charge, Computer Station, in shaping this book. The 
contributions of the Publication Department, NCERT, New Delhi,  in bringing out 
this book are also duly acknowledged.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 9 :
 9
answerS
Contents
	
Foreword	
iii
	
Rationalisation of Content in the Textbooks	
v
Unit 1	
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry	
1
	
1.1	 Importance of Chemistry	
4
	
1.2	 Nature of Matter	
4
	
1.3	 Properties of Matter and their Measurement	
6
	
1.4	 Uncertainty in Measurement	
10
	
1.5	 Laws of Chemical Combinations	
14
	
1.6	 Dalton’s Atomic Theory	
16
	
1.7	 Atomic and Molecular Masses	
16
	
1.8	 Mole Concept and Molar Masses	
18
	
1.9	 Percentage Composition	
18
	
1.10	Stoichiometry and Stoichiometric Calculations	
20
Unit 2	
Structure of Atom	
29
	
2.1	 Discovery of Sub-atomic Particles	
30
	
2.2	 Atomic Models	
32
	
2.3	 Developments Leading to the Bohr’s Model of Atom	
37
	
2.4	 Bohr’s Model for Hydrogen Atom	
46
	
2.5	 Towards Quantum Mechanical Model of the Atom	
49
	
2.6	 Quantum Mechanical Model of Atom	
53
Unit 3	
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties	
74
	
3.1	 Why do we Need to Classify Elements ?	
74
	
3.2	 Genesis of Periodic Classification	
75
	
3.3	 Modern Periodic Law and the Present Form of the Periodic Table	
78
	
3.4	 Nomenclature of Elements with Atomic Numbers > 100	
78
	
3.5	 Electronic Configurations of Elements and the Periodic Table	
81
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 10 :
 10
chemistry
	
3.6	 Electronic Configurations and Types of Elements:	
82
	
	
s-, p-, d-, f- Blocks
	
3.7	 Periodic Trends in Properties of Elements	
85
Unit 4	
Chemical Bonding and Molecular Structure	
100
	
4.1	 Kössel-Lewis Approach to Chemical Bonding 	
101
	
4.2	 Ionic or Electrovalent Bond 	
106
	
4.3	 Bond Parameters	
107
	
4.4	 The Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) Theory	
112
	
4.5	 Valence Bond Theory	
117
	
4.6	 Hybridisation 	
120
	
4.7	 Molecular Orbital Theory 	
125
	
4.8	 Bonding in Some Homonuclear Diatomic Molecules	
129
	
4.9	 Hydrogen Bonding 	
131
Unit 5	
Thermodynamics	
136
	
5.1	 Thermodynamic Terms	
137
	
5.2	 Applications	
140
	
5.3	 Measurement of ∆U and ∆H: Calorimetry	
145
	
5.4	 Enthalpy Change, ∆rH of a Reaction – Reaction Enthalpy	
146
	
5.5	 Enthalpies for Different Types of Reactions	
152
	
5.6	 Spontaneity	
157
	
5.7	 Gibbs Energy Change and Equilibrium	
162
Unit 6	
Equilibrium	
168
	
6.1	 Equilibrium in Physical Processes	
169
	
6.2	 Equilibrium in Chemical Processes – Dynamic Equilibrium	
172
	
6.3	 Law of Chemical Equilibrium and Equilibrium Constant	
174
	
6.4	 Homogeneous Equilibria	
177
	
6.5	 Heterogeneous Equilibria	
179
	
6.6	 Applications of Equilibrium Constants	
181
	
6.7	 Relationship between Equilibrium Constant K, 	
184
	
	
Reaction Quotient Q and Gibbs Energy G
(x)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 11 :
 11
answerS
	
6.8	 Factors Affecting Equilibria	
184
	
6.9	 Ionic Equilibrium in Solution	
188
	
6.10	Acids, Bases and Salts	
189
	
6.11	Ionization of Acids and Bases	
192
	
6.12	Buffer Solutions	
202
	
6.13	Solubility Equilibria of Sparingly Soluble Salts	
204
	
Appendices	
215
	
Answer to Some Selected Problems	
229
	
	
(xi)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 12 :
 12
chemistry
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 1 :
 UNIT 1
SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRY
Science can be viewed as a continuing human effort to 
systematise knowledge for describing and understanding 
nature. You have learnt in your previous classes that we 
come across diverse substances present in nature and 
changes in them in daily life. Curd formation from milk, 
formation of vinegar from sugarcane juice on keeping 
for prolonged time and rusting of iron are some of the 
examples of changes which we come across many times. 
For the sake of convenience, science is sub-divided into 
various disciplines: chemistry, physics, biology, geology, 
etc. The branch of science that studies the preparation, 
properties, structure and reactions of material substances 
is called chemistry.
DEVELOPMENT OF CHEMISTRY
Chemistry, as we understand it today, is not a very old 
discipline. Chemistry was not studied for its own sake, rather 
it came up as a result of search for two interesting things:
	
i.	 Philosopher’s stone (Paras) which would convert 
all baser metals e.g., iron and copper into gold.
	
ii.	 ‘Elixir of life’ which would grant immortality.
People in ancient India, already had the knowledge of 
many scientific phenomenon much before the advent of 
modern science. They applied that knowledge in various 
walks of life. Chemistry developed mainly in the form 
of Alchemy and Iatrochemistry during 1300-1600 CE. 
Modern chemistry took shape in the 18th century Europe, 
after a few centuries of alchemical traditions which were 
introduced in Europe by the Arabs. 
After studying this unit, you will be 
able to
•	
appreciate the contribution of India 
in the development of chemistry 
understand the role of chemistry 
in different spheres of life;
•	
explain the characteristics of three 
states of matter;
•	
classify different substances 
into elements, compounds and 
mixtures;
•	
use scientific notations and 
determine significant figures;
•	
differentiate between precision and 
accuracy;
•	
define SI base units and convert 
physical quantities from one 
system of units to another;
•	
explain various laws of chemical 
combination;
•	
appreciate significance of atomic 
mass, average atomic mass, 
molecular mass and formula mass;
•	
describe the terms – mole and 
molar mass;
•	
calculate the mass per cent of 
component elements constituting 
a compound;
•	
determine empirical formula and 
molecular formula for a compound 
from the given experimental data; 
and
•	
perform the stoichiometric 
calculations. 
Chemistry is the science of molecules and their 
transformations. It is the science not so much of the one 
hundred elements but of the infinite variety of molecules 
that may be built from them.
Roald Hoffmann
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 2 :
 2
chemistry
Other cultures – especially the Chinese 
and the Indian – had their own alchemical 
traditions. These included much knowledge of 
chemical processes and techniques.
In ancient India, chemistry was called 
Rasayan Shastra, Rastantra, Ras Kriya or 
Rasvidya. It included metallurgy, medicine, 
manufacture of cosmetics, glass, dyes, etc. 
Systematic excavations at Mohenjodaro in 
Sindh and Harappa in Punjab prove that the 
story of development of chemistry in India 
is very old. Archaeological findings show 
that baked bricks were used in construction 
work. It shows the mass production of 
pottery, which can be regarded as the earliest 
chemical process, in which materials were 
mixed, moulded and subjected to heat by 
using fire to achieve desirable qualities. 
Remains of glazed pottery have been found in 
Mohenjodaro. Gypsum cement has been used 
in the construction work. It contains lime, 
sand and traces of CaCO3. Harappans made 
faience, a sort of glass which was used in 
ornaments. They melted and forged a variety 
of objects from metals, such as lead, silver, 
gold and copper. They improved the hardness 
of copper for making artefacts by using tin 
and arsenic. A number of glass objects were 
found in Maski in South India (1000–900 
BCE), and  Hastinapur and Taxila in North 
India (1000–200 BCE). Glass and glazes were 
coloured by addition of colouring agents like 
metal oxides.
Copper metallurgy in India dates back to 
the beginning of chalcolithic cultures in the 
subcontinent. There are much archeological 
evidences to support the view that technologies 
for extraction of copper and iron were 
developed indigenously.
According to Rigveda, tanning of leather 
and dying of cotton were practised during 
1000–400 BCE. The golden gloss of the 
black polished ware of northen India could 
not  be replicated and is still a chemical 
mystery. These wares indicate the mastery 
with which kiln temperatures could be 
controlled. Kautilya’s Arthashastra describes 
the production of salt from sea.
A vast number of statements and material 
described in the ancient Vedic literature can 
be shown to agree with modern scientific 
findings. Copper utensils, iron, gold, silver 
ornaments and terracotta discs and painted 
grey pottery have been found in many 
archaeological sites in north India. Sushruta 
Samhita explains the importance of Alkalies. 
The Charaka Samhita mentions ancient 
indians who knew how to prepare sulphuric 
acid, nitric acid and oxides of copper, tin and 
zinc; the sulphates of copper, zinc and iron 
and the carbonates of lead and iron.
Rasopanishada describes the preparation 
of gunpowder mixture. Tamil texts also 
describe the preparation of fireworks using 
sulphur, charcoal, saltpetre (i.e., potassium 
nitrate), mercury, camphor, etc.
Nagarjuna was a great Indian scientist. He 
was a reputed chemist, an alchemist and a 
metallurgist. His work Rasratnakar deals with 
the formulation of mercury compounds. He 
has also discussed methods for the extraction 
of metals, like gold, silver, tin and copper. A 
book, Rsarnavam, appeared around 800 CE. 
It discusses the uses of various furnaces, 
ovens and crucibles for different purposes. It 
describes methods by which metals could be 
identified by flame colour. 
Chakrapani discovered mercury sulphide. 
The credit for inventing soap also goes to him. 
He used mustard oil and some alkalies as 
ingredients for making soap. Indians began 
making soaps in the 18th century CE. Oil of 
Eranda and seeds of Mahua plant and calcium 
carbonate were used for making soap.
The paintings found on the walls of Ajanta 
and Ellora, which look fresh even after ages, 
testify to a high level of science achieved in 
ancient India. Varähmihir’s Brihat Samhita is 
a sort of encyclopaedia, which was composed 
in the sixth century CE. It informs about the 
preparation of glutinous material to be applied 
on walls and roofs of houses and temples. It 
was prepared entirely from extracts of various 
plants, fruits, seeds and barks, which were 
concentrated by boiling, and then, treated 
with various resins. It will be interesting to 
test such materials scientifically and assess 
them for use. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 3 :
 3
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry
A number of classical texts, like 
Atharvaveda (1000 BCE) mention some 
dye stuff, the material used were turmeric, 
madder, sunflower, orpiment, cochineal and 
lac. Some other substances having tinting 
property were kamplcica, pattanga and jatuka. 
Varähmihir’s Brihat Samhita gives 
references to perfumes and cosmetics. 
Recipes for hair dying were made from plants, 
like indigo and minerals like iron power, 
black iron or steel and acidic extracts of sour 
rice gruel. Gandhayukli describes recipes 
for making scents, mouth perfumes, bath 
powders, incense and talcum power.
Paper was known to India in the 17th 
century as account of Chinese traveller I-tsing 
describes. Excavations at Taxila indicate that 
ink was used in India from the fourth century. 
Colours of ink were made from chalk, red lead 
and minimum.
It seems that the process of fermentation 
was well-known to Indians. Vedas and 
Kautilya’s Arthashastra mention about 
many types of liquors. Charaka Samhita also 
mentions ingredients, such as barks of plants, 
stem, flowers, leaves, woods, cereals, fruits 
and sugarcane for making Asavas.
The concept that matter is ultimately 
made of indivisible building blocks, appeared 
in  India a few centuries BCE as a part of 
philosophical speculations. Acharya Kanda, 
born in 600 BCE, originally known by the 
name Kashyap, was the first proponent 
of the ‘atomic theory’. He formulated the 
theory of very small indivisible particles, 
which he named ‘Paramãnu’ (comparable 
to atoms). He authored the text Vaiseshika 
Sutras. According to him, all substances are 
aggregated form of smaller units called atoms 
(Paramãnu), which are eternal, indestructible, 
spherical, suprasensible and in motion in 
the original state. He explained that this 
individual entity cannot be sensed through 
any human organ. Kanda added that there 
are varieties of atoms that are as different as 
the different classes of substances. He said 
these (Paramãnu) could form pairs or triplets, 
among other combinations and unseen 
forces cause interaction between them. He 
conceptualised this theory around 2500 years 
before John Dalton (1766-1844). 
Charaka Samhita is the oldest Ayurvedic 
epic of India. It describes the treatment of 
diseases. The concept of reduction of particle 
size of metals is clearly discussed in Charaka 
Samhita. Extreme reduction of particle size is 
termed as nanotechnology. Charaka Samhita 
describes the use of bhasma of metals in the 
treatment of ailments. Now-a-days, it has 
been proved that bhasmas have nanoparticles 
of metals. 
After the decline of alchemy, Iatrochemistry 
reached a steady state, but it too declined due 
to the introduction and practise of western 
medicinal system in the 20th century. During 
this period of stagnation, pharmaceutical 
industry based on Ayurveda continued to 
exist, but it too declined gradually. It took 
about 100-150 years for Indians to learn 
and adopt new techniques. During this time, 
foreign products poured in. As a result, 
indigenous traditional techniques gradually 
declined. Modern science appeared in Indian 
scene in the later part of the nineteenth 
century. By the mid-nineteenth century, 
European scientists started coming to India 
and modern chemistry started growing.
From the above discussion, you have learnt 
that chemistry deals with the composition, 
structure, properties and interection of matter 
and is of much use to human beings in daily 
life. These aspects can be best described and 
understood in terms of basic constituents of 
matter that are atoms and molecules. That 
is why, chemistry is also called the science of 
atoms and molecules. Can we see, weigh and 
perceive these entities (atoms and molecules)? 
Is it possible to count the number of atoms 
and molecules in a given mass of matter and 
have a quantitative relationship between the 
mass and the number of these particles? 
We will get the answer of some of these 
questions in this Unit. We will further describe 
how physical properties of matter can be 
quantitatively described using numerical 
values with suitable units. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 4 :
 4
chemistry
1.1	
IMPORTANCE OF CHEMISTRY
Chemistry plays a central role in science and 
is often intertwined with other branches of 
science.
Principles of chemistry are applicable 
in diverse areas, such as weather patterns, 
functioning of brain and operation of a 
computer, production in chemical industries, 
manufacturing fertilisers, alkalis, acids, salts, 
dyes, polymers, drugs, soaps, detergents, 
metals, alloys, etc., including new material.
Chemistry contributes in a big way to the 
national economy. It also plays an important 
role in meeting human needs for food, 
healthcare products and other material 
aimed at improving the quality of life.  This 
is exemplified by the large-scale production 
of a variety of fertilisers, improved variety 
of pesticides and insecticides. Chemistry 
provides methods for the isolation of life-
saving drugs from natural sources and 
makes possible synthesis of such drugs. 
Some of these drugs are cisplatin and 
taxol, which are effective in cancer therapy. 
The drug AZT (Azidothymidine) is used for 
helping AIDS patients. 
Chemistry contributes to a large extent in 
the development and growth of a nation. With 
a better understanding of chemical principles 
it has now become possible to design and 
synthesise new material having specific 
magnetic, electric and optical properties.  This 
has lead to the production of superconducting 
ceramics, conducting polymers, optical fibres, 
etc. Chemistry has helped in establishing 
industries which manufacture utility goods, 
like acids, alkalies, dyes, polymesr metals, 
etc. These industries contribute in a big way 
to the economy of a nation and generate 
employment. 
In recent years, chemistry has helped in 
dealing with some of the pressing aspects 
of environmental degradation with a fair 
degree of success. Safer alternatives to 
environmentally hazardous refrigerants, 
like CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons), responsible 
for ozone depletion in the stratosphere, have 
been successfully synthesised. However, 
many big environmental problems continue to 
be matters of grave concern to the chemists. 
One such problem is the management of the 
Green House gases, like methane, carbon 
dioxide, etc. Understanding of biochemical 
processes, use of enzymes for large-scale 
production of chemicals and synthesis of new 
exotic material are some of the intellectual 
challenges for the future generation of 
chemists. A developing country, like India, 
needs talented and creative chemists for 
accepting such challenges. To be a good 
chemist and to accept such challanges, one 
needs to understand the basic concepts of 
chemistry, which begin with the concept of 
matter. Let us start with the nature of matter.
1.2	
Nature of Matter
You are already familiar with the term matter 
from your earlier classes. Anything which has 
mass and occupies space is called matter. 
Everything around us, for example, book, pen, 
pencil, water, air, all living beings, etc., are 
composed of matter. You know that they have 
mass and they occupy space. Let us recall the 
characteristics of the states of matter, which 
you learnt in your previous classes.
1.2.1	 States of Matter
You are aware that matter can exist in three 
physical states viz. solid, liquid and gas. 
The constituent particles of matter in these 
three states can be represented as shown in 
Fig. 1.1.
Particles are held very close to each other 
in solids in an orderly fashion and there is not 
much freedom of movement. In liquids, the 
particles are close to each other but they can 
move around. However, in gases, the particles 
are far apart as compared to those present in 
solid or liquid states and their movement is 
easy and fast. Because of such arrangement 
of particles, different states of matter exhibit 
the following characteristics:
(i)	
Solids have definite volume and definite 
shape.
(ii)	
Liquids have definite volume but do 
not have definite shape. They take the 
shape of the container in which they are 
placed.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 5 :
 5
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry
(iii)	 Gases have neither definite volume nor 
definite shape. They completely occupy 
the space in the container in which they 
are placed.
These three states of matter are 
interconvertible by changing the conditions 
of temperature and pressure.
Solid 
 liquid 
 Gas
On heating, a solid usually changes to 
a liquid, and the liquid on further heating 
changes to gas (or vapour). In the reverse 
process, a gas on cooling liquifies to the liquid 
and the liquid on further cooling freezes to 
the solid.
1.2.2. Classification of Matter
In Class IX (Chapter 2), you have learnt that 
at the macroscopic or bulk level, matter can 
be classified as mixture or pure substance. 
These can be further sub-divided as shown 
in Fig. 1.2.
When all constituent particles of a 
substance are same in chemical nature, it 
is said to be a pure substance. A mixture 
contains many types of particles.
A mixture contains particles of two or 
more pure substances which may be present 
in it in any ratio. Hence, their composition is 
variable. Pure substances forming mixture 
are called its components. Many of the 
substances present around you are mixtures. 
For example, sugar solution in water, air, 
tea, etc., are all mixtures. A mixture may 
be homogeneous or heterogeneous. In a 
homogeneous mixture, the components 
Fig. 1.2   Classification of matter
Fig. 1.1	
Arrangement of particles in solid, liquid 
and gaseous state
completely mix with each other. This means 
particles of components of the mixture are 
uniformly distributed throughout the bulk of 
the mixture and its composition is uniform 
throughout. Sugar solution and air are the 
examples of homogeneous mixtures. In 
contrast to this, in a heterogeneous mixture, 
the composition is not uniform throughout 
and sometimes different components are 
visible. For example, mixtures of salt and 
sugar, grains and pulses along with some 
dirt (often stone pieces), are heterogeneous 
mixtures. You can think of many more 
examples of mixtures which you come across 
in the daily life. It is worthwhile to mention 
here that the components of a mixture can 
be separated by using physical methods, 
such as simple hand-picking, filtration, 
crystallisation, distillation, etc. 
Pure substances have characteristics 
different from mixtures. Constituent particles 
of pure substances have fixed composition. 
Copper, silver, gold, water and glucose are 
some examples of pure substances. Glucose 
contains carbon, hydrogen and oxygen in 
a fixed ratio and its particles are of same 
composition. Hence, like all other pure 
substances, glucose has a fixed composition. 
Also, its constituents—carbon, hydrogen 
and oxygen—cannot be separated by simple 
physical methods.
Pure substances can further be classified 
into elements and compounds. Particles 
of an element consist of only one type of 
atoms. These particles may exist as atoms or 
molecules. You may be familiar with atoms 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 6 :
 6
chemistry
and molecules from the previous classes; 
however, you will be studying about them 
in detail in Unit 2. Sodium, copper, silver, 
hydrogen, oxygen, etc., are some examples 
of elements. Their all atoms are of one type. 
However, the atoms of different elements 
are different in nature. Some elements, 
such as sodium or copper, contain atoms 
as their constituent particles, whereas, in 
some others, the constituent particles are 
molecules which are formed by two or more 
atoms. For example, hydrogen, nitrogen and 
oxygen gases consist of molecules, in which 
two atoms combine to give their respective 
molecules. This is illustrated in Fig. 1.3.
elements are present in a compound in a fixed 
and definite ratio and this ratio is characteristic 
of a particular compound. Also, the properties 
of a compound are different from those of its 
constituent elements. For example, hydrogen 
and oxygen are gases, whereas, the compound 
formed by their combination i.e., water is a 
liquid. It is interesting to note that hydrogen 
burns with a pop sound and oxygen is a 
supporter of combustion, but water is used 
as a fire extinguisher.
1.3	
Properties of Matter and 
their Measurement
1.3.1 Physical and chemical properties 
Every substance has unique or characteristic 
properties. These properties can be classified 
into two categories — physical properties, 
such as colour, odour, melting point, boiling 
point, density, etc., and chemical properties, 
like composition, combustibility, ractivity with 
acids and bases, etc.
Physical properties can be measured 
or observed without changing the identity 
or the composition of the substance. The 
measurement or observation of chemical 
properties requires a chemical change to 
occur. Measurement of physical properties 
does not require occurance of a chemical 
change. The examples of chemical properties 
are characteristic reactions of different 
substances; these include acidity or basicity, 
combustibility, etc. Chemists describe, 
interpret and predict the behaviour of 
substances on the basis of knowledge of their 
physical and chemical properties, which are 
determined by careful measurement and 
experimentation. In the following section, we 
When two or more atoms of  different 
elements combine together in a definite ratio, 
the molecule of a compound is obtained. 
Moreover, the constituents of a compound 
cannot be separated into simpler substances 
by physical methods. They can be separated 
by chemical methods. Examples of some 
compounds are water, ammonia, carbon 
dioxide, sugar, etc. The molecules of water 
and carbon dioxide are represented in Fig. 1.4.
Note that a water molecule comprises 
two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. 
Similarly, a molecule of carbon dioxide 
contains two oxygen atoms combined with 
one carbon atom. Thus, the atoms of different 
Fig. 1.4	
A depiction of molecules of water and 
carbon dioxide
Water molecule 
(H2O) 
Carbon dioxide 
molecule (CO2)
Fig. 1.3	
A representation of atoms and molecules
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 7 :
 7
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry
will learn about the  measurement of physical 
properties.
1.3.2 Measurement of physical properties
Quantitative measurement of properties is 
reaquired for scientific investigation. Many 
properties of matter, such as length, area, 
volume, etc., are quantitative in nature. Any 
quantitative observation or measurement is 
represented by a number followed by units 
in which it is measured. For example, length 
of a room can be represented as  6 m; here, 
6 is the number and m denotes metre, the 
unit in which the length is measured.
Earlier, two different systems of 
measurement, i.e., the English System 
and the Metric System were being used 
in different parts of the world. The metric 
system, which originated in France in late 
eighteenth century, was more convenient as 
it was based on the decimal system. Late, 
need of a common standard system was felt 
by the scientific community. Such a system 
was established in 1960 and is discussed in 
detail below.
1.3.3	 The International System of Units (SI)
The International System of Units (in 
French Le Systeme International d’Unités 
— abbreviated as SI) was established by 
the 11th General Conference on Weights and 
Measures (CGPM from Conference Generale 
des Poids et Measures). The CGPM is an inter-
governmental treaty organisation created by a 
diplomatic treaty known as Metre Convention, 
which was signed in Paris in 1875.
The SI system has seven base units 
and they are listed in Table 1.1. These units 
pertain to the seven fundamental scientific 
quantities. The other physical quantities, 
such as speed, volume, density, etc., can be 
derived from these quantities. 
Maintaining the National  
Standards of Measurement
The system of units, including unit 
definitions, keeps on changing with time. 
Whenever the accuracy of measurement of a 
particular unit was enhanced substantially 
by adopting new principles, member nations 
of metre treaty (signed in 1875), agreed 
to change the formal definition of that 
unit. Each modern industrialised country, 
including India, has a National Metrology 
Institute (NMI), which maintains standards of 
measurements.  This responsibility has been 
given to the National Physical Laboratory 
(NPL), New Delhi. This laboratory establishes 
experiments to realise the base units and 
derived units of measurement and maintains 
National Standards of Measurement. These 
standards are periodically inter-compared 
with standards maintained at other National 
Metrology Institutes in the world, as well 
as those, established at the International 
Bureau of Standards in Paris.
Table 1.1  Base Physical Quantities and their Units
Base Physical
Quantity
Symbol for 
Quantity
Name of  
SI Unit
Symbol for  
SI Unit
Length
Mass
Time
Electric current
Thermodynamic 
temperature
Amount of 
substance
Luminous 
intensity
l
m
t
I
T
n
Iv
metre
kilogram
second
ampere
kelvin
mole 
candela
m
kg
s
A
K
mol
cd
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 8 :
 8
chemistry
These prefixes are listed in Table 1.3.
Let us now quickly go through some of 
the quantities which you will be often using 
in this book.
The definitions of the SI base units are 
given in Table 1.2.
The SI system allows the use of prefixes to 
indicate the multiples or submultiples of a unit.  
Table 1.2  Definitions of SI Base Units
Unit of length
metre
The metre, symbol m is the SI unit of length. It is defined by 
taking the fixed numerical value of the speed of light in vacuum 
c to be 299792458 when expressed in the unit ms–1, where 
the second is defined in terms of the caesium frequencyV
Cs.
Unit of mass
kilogram
The kilogram, symbol kg. is the SI unit of mass. It is defined 
by taking the fixed numerical value of the planck constant h to 
be 6.62607015×10–34 when expressed in the unit Js, which is 
equal to kgm2s–1, where the metre and the second are defined 
in terms of c and V
Cs.
Unit of time
second
The second symbol s, is the SI unit of time. It is defined by 
taking the fixed numerical value of the caesium frequency V
Cs, 
the unperturbed ground-state hyperfine transition frequency 
of the caesium-133 atom, to be 9192631770 when expressed 
in the unit Hz, which is equal to s–1.
Unit of electric 
current
ampere
The ampere, symbol A, is the SI unit of electric current. It is 
defined by taking the fixed numerical value of the elementary 
charge e to be 1.602176634×10–19 when expressed in the unit 
C, which is equal to As, where the second is defined in terms 
of V
Cs.
Unit of 
thermodynamic 
temperature
kelvin
The kelvin, symbol k, is the SI unit of thermodynamic 
temperature. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical value 
of the Boltzmann constant k to be 1.380649×10–23 when 
expressed in the unit JK–1, which is equal to kgm2s–2k–1 where 
the kilogram, metre and second are defined in terms of h, c 
and V
Cs.
Unit of amount 
of substance
mole
The mole, symbol mol, is the SI unit of amount of substance. 
One mole contains exactly 6.02214076×1023 elementary 
entities. This number is the fixed numerical value of the 
Avogadro constant, NA, when expressed in the unit mol–1 and 
is called the Avogadro number. The amount of substance, 
symbol n, of a system is a measure of the number of specified 
elementary entities. An elementary entity may be an atom, a 
molecule, an ion, an electron, any other particle or specified 
group of particles.
Unit of luminous 
Intensity
Candela
The candela, symbol cd is the SI unit of luminous intensity in 
a given direction. It is defined by taking the fixed numerical 
value of the luminous efficacy of monochromatic radiation 
of frequency 540×1012 Hz, Kcd, to be 683 when expressed 
in the unit lm·W–1, which is equal to cd·sr·W–1, or cd sr kg–1 
m–2s3, where the kilogram, metre and second are defined in 
terms of h, c and V
Cs.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 9 :
 9
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry
Fig. 1.5    Analytical balance
1.3.4 Mass and Weight
Mass of a substance is the amount of matter 
present in it, while weight is the force 
exerted by gravity on an object. The mass of 
a substance is constant, whereas, its weight 
may vary from one place to another due to 
change in gravity. You should be careful in 
using these terms.
The mass of a substance can be determined 
accurately in the laboratory by using an 
analytical balance (Fig. 1.5). 
The SI unit of mass as given in Table 1.1 is 
kilogram. However, its fraction named as gram  
(1 kg = 1000 g), is used in laboratories due 
to the smaller amounts of chemicals used in 
chemical reactions.
1.3.5 Volume
Volume is the amont of space occupied by a 
substance. It has the units of (length)3. So in 
SI system, volume has units of m3. But again, 
in chemistry laboratories, smaller volumes 
are used. Hence, volume is often denoted in 
cm3 or dm3 units.
A common unit, litre (L) which is not an 
SI unit, is used for measurement of volume 
of liquids.
1 L = 1000 mL,  1000 cm3 = 1 dm3
Fig. 1.6 helps to visualise these relations. 
Fig. 1.6 	
Different units used to express 
volume
Table 1.3  Prefixes used in the SI System
Multiple
Prefix
Symbol
10–24
10–21
10–18
10–15
10–12
10–9
10–6
10–3
10–2
10–1
10
102
103
106
109
1012
1015
1018
1021
1024
yocto
zepto
atto
femto
pico
nano
micro
milli
centi
deci
deca
hecto
kilo
mega
giga
tera
peta
exa
zeta
yotta
y
z
a
f
p
n
µ
m
c
d
da
h
k
M
G
T
P
E
Z
Y
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 10 :
 10
chemistry
In the laboratory, the volume of liquids 
or solutions can be measured by graduated 
cylinder, burette, pipette, etc. A volumetric 
flask  is used to prepare a known volume of a 
solution. These measuring devices are shown 
in Fig. 1.7.
 Fig. 1.7	
Some volume measuring devices
1.4	
Uncertainty in Measurement
Many a time in the study of chemistry, one 
has to deal with experimental data as well as 
theoretical calculations. There are meaningful 
ways to handle the numbers conveniently and 
fahrenheit) and K (kelvin). Here, K is the 
SI unit. The thermometers based on these 
scales are shown in Fig. 1.8. Generally, 
the thermometer with celsius scale are 
calibrated from 0° to 100°, where these two 
temperatures are the freezing point and 
the boiling point of water, respectively. The 
fahrenheit scale is represented between 32° 
to 212°. 
The temperatures on two scales are 
related to each other by the following 
relationship:






F
C
9
5
32  
The kelvin scale is related to celsius scale 
as follows:
K = °C + 273.15
It is interesting to note that temperature 
below 0 °C (i.e., negative values) are possible 
in Celsius scale but in Kelvin scale, negative 
temperature is not possible.
Fig. 1.8	
Thermometers using different 
temperature scales
1.3.6	 Density
The two properties — mass and volume 
discussed above are related as follows:
=
Mass
Density
Volume
Density of a substance is its amount of mass 
per unit volume. So, SI units of density can 
be obtained as follows:
SI unit of density = 
	
                         = kg
m3  or kg m–3
This unit is quite large and a chemist often 
expresses density in g cm–3, where mass is 
expressed in gram and volume is expressed 
in cm3. Density of a substance tells us about 
how closely its particles are packed. If density 
is more, it means particles are more closely 
packed.
1.3.7	 Temperature
There are three common scales to measure 
temperature — °C (degree  celsius), °F (degree 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 11 :
 11
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry
present the data realistically with certainty to 
the extent possible. These ideas are discussed 
below in detail.
1.4.1 Scientific Notation
As chemistry is the study of atoms and 
molecules, which have extremely low masses 
and are present in extremely large numbers, 
a chemist has to deal with numbers as large 
as 602, 200,000,000,000,000,000,000 for the 
molecules of 2 g of hydrogen gas or as small as 
0.00000000000000000000000166 g mass of 
a H atom. Similarly, other constants such as 
Planck’s constant, speed of light, charges on 
particles, etc., involve numbers of the above 
magnitude.
It may look funny for a moment to 
write or count numbers involving so many 
zeros but it offers a real challenge to do 
simple mathematical operations of addition, 
subtraction, multiplication or division with 
such numbers. You can write any two 
numbers of the above type and try any one 
of the operations you like to accept as a 
challenge, and then, you will really appreciate 
the difficulty in handling such numbers.
This problem is solved by using scientific 
notation for such numbers, i.e., exponential 
notation in which any number can be 
represented in the form N × 10n, where n is an 
exponent having positive or negative values 
and N is a number (called digit term) which 
varies between 1.000... and 9.999....
Thus, we can write 232.508 as  
2.32508 × 102 in scientific notation. Note that 
while writing it, the decimal had to be moved 
to the left by two places and same is the 
exponent (2) of 10 in the scientific notation.
Similarly, 0.00016 can be written as  
1.6 × 10–4. Here, the decimal has to be 
moved four places to the right and (–4) is the 
exponent in the scientific notation.
While performing mathematical operations 
on numbers expressed in scientific notations, 
the following points are to be kept in mind.
Reference Standard
After defining a unit of measurement such as 
the kilogram or the metre, scientists agreed 
on reference standards that make it possible 
to calibrate all measuring devices. For getting 
reliable measurements, all devices such as 
metre sticks and analytical balances have 
been calibrated by their manufacturers 
to give correct readings. However, each of 
these devices is standardised or calibrated 
against some reference. The mass standard 
is the kilogram since 1889. It has been 
defined as the mass of platinum-iridium 
(Pt-Ir) cylinder that is stored in an airtight 
jar at International Bureau of Weights 
and Measures in Sevres, France. Pt-Ir was 
chosen for this standard because it is highly 
resistant to chemical attack and its mass 
will not change for an extremely long time. 
Scientists are in search of a new 
standard for mass. This is being attempted 
through accurate determination of Avogadro 
constant. Work on this new standard focuses 
on ways to measure accurately the number 
of atoms in a well-defined mass of sample. 
One such method, which uses X-rays to 
determine the atomic density of a crystal of 
ultrapure silicon, has an accuracy of about 
1 part in 106  but has not yet been adopted to 
serve as a standard. There are other methods 
but none of them are presently adequate to 
replace the Pt-Ir cylinder. No doubt, changes 
are expected within this decade. 
The metre was originally defined as the 
length between two marks on a Pt-Ir bar 
kept at a temperature of 0°C (273.15 K).  In 
1960 the length of the metre was defined as 
1.65076373 × 106 times the wavelength of 
light emitted by a krypton laser. Although 
this was a cumbersome number, it preserved 
the length of the metre at its agreed value. 
The metre was redefined in 1983 by CGPM 
as the length of path travelled by light in 
vacuum during a time interval of 1/299 792 
458 of a second. Similar to the length and 
the mass, there are reference standards for 
other physical quantities. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 12 :
 12
chemistry
Multiplication and Division
These two operations follow the same rules 
which are there for exponential numbers, i.e.
mass obtained by an analytical balance is 
slightly higher than the mass obtained by 
using a platform balance. Therefore, digit 4 
placed after decimal in the measurement by 
platform balance is uncertain. 
The uncertainty in the experimental 
or the calculated values is indicated by 
mentioning the number of significant 
figures. Significant figures are meaningful 
digits which are known with certainty plus 
one which is estimated or uncertain. The 
uncertainty is indicated by writing the certain 
digits and the last uncertain digit. Thus, if we 
write a result as 11.2 mL, we say the 11 is 
certain and 2 is uncertain and the uncertainty 
would be +1 in the last digit. Unless otherwise 
stated, an uncertainty of +1 in the last digit 
is always understood. 
There are certain rules for determining 
the number of significant figures. These are 
stated below:
(1)	
All non-zero digits are significant. For 
example in 285 cm, there are three 
significant figures and in 0.25 mL, there 
are two significant figures.
(2)	
Zeros preceding to first non-zero digit 
are not significant. Such zero indicates 
the position of decimal point. Thus, 
0.03 has one significant figure and 
0.0052 has two significant figures.
(3)	
Zeros between two non-zero digits 
are significant. Thus, 2.005 has four 
significant figures.
(4)	
Zeros at the end or right of a number 
are significant, provided they are on 
the right side of the decimal point. For 
example, 0.200 g has three significant 
figures. But, if otherwise, the terminal 
zeros are not significant if there is no 
decimal point. For example, 100 has 
only one significant figure, but 100 has 
three significant figures and 100.0 has 
four significant figures. Such numbers 
are better represented in scientific 
notation. We can express the number 
100 as 1×102 for one significant figure, 
1.0×102 for two significant figures and 
1.00×102 for three significant figures.
Addition and Subtraction 
For these two operations, first the numbers are 
written in such a way that they have the same 
exponent. After that, the coefficients (digit 
terms) are added or subtracted as the case 
may be.
Thus, for  adding  6.65×104  and  8.95×103, 
exponent is made same for both the numbers. 
Thus, we get (6.65×104) + (0.895×104)
Then, these numbers can be added as follows 
(6.65 + 0.895)×104 = 7.545×104
Similarly, the subtraction of two numbers can 
be done as shown below:
(2.5 × 10–2) – (4.8 ×10–3)
	
= (2.5 × 10–2) – (0.48 × 10–2) 
	
= (2.5 – 0.48)×10–2 = 2.02 × 10–2
1.4.2 Significant Figures
Every experimental measurement has 
some amount of uncertainty associated 
with it because of limitation of measuring 
instrument and the skill of the person making 
the measurement. For example, mass of an 
object is obtained using a platform balance 
and it comes out to be 9.4g. On measuring 
the mass of this object on an analytical 
balance, the mass obtained is 9.4213g. The 
5 6
10
6 9
10
5 6
6 9 10
5 6
6 9
10
5
8
5 8
13
.
.
.
.
.
.














=
   =
= 38.64
10
= 3.864
10
=
13
14














9 8
10
2 5
10
9 8
2 5 10
2
6
2
.
.
.
.

6
2 6
3
9 8
2 5 10
2 7
10
5















=
= 24.50
10
= 2.450
10
8
7
.
.
.
.5
10
2 7
5 5 10
1
4
3 4










=
=0.4909
0
=4.909
10
7
8
.
.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 13 :
 13
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry
(5)	
Counting the numbers of object, for 
example, 2 balls or 20 eggs, have infinite 
significant figures as these are exact 
numbers and can be represented by 
writing infinite number of zeros after 
placing a decimal i.e., 2 = 2.000000 or 
20 = 20.000000. 
In numbers written in scientific notation, 
all digits are significant e.g., 4.01×102 has 
three significant figures, and 8.256×10–3 has 
four significant figures.
However, one would always like the results 
to be precise and accurate. Precision and 
accuracy are often referred to while we talk 
about the measurement.
Precision refers to the closeness of 
various measurements for the same quantity. 
However, accuracy is the agreement of a 
particular value to the true value of the 
result. For example, if the true value for a 
result is 2.00 g and student ‘A’ takes two 
measurements and reports the results as 1.95 
g and 1.93 g. These values are precise as they 
are close to each other but are not accurate. 
Another student ‘B’ repeats the experiment 
and obtains 1.94 g and 2.05 g as the results 
for two measurements. These observations 
are neither precise nor accurate. When the 
third student ‘C’ repeats these measurements 
and reports 2.01 g and 1.99 g as the result, 
these values are both precise and accurate. 
This can be more clearly understood from the 
data given in Table 1.4.
Table 1.4 	 Data to Illustrate Precision  
and Accuracy
Measurements/g
1
2
Average (g)
Student A
Student B
Student C
1.95
1.94
2.01
1.93
2.05
1.99
1.940
1.995
2.000
Addition and Subtraction of 
Significant Figures
The result cannot have more digits to the right 
of the decimal point than either of the original 
numbers. 	
12.11
	
	
	
18.0
	
	
	
1.012
	
	
	
31.122
Here, 18.0 has only one digit after the decimal 
point and the result should be reported only 
up to one digit after the decimal point, which 
is 31.1.
Multiplication and Division of 
Significant Figures
In these operations, the result must be 
reported with no more significant figures as 
in the measurement with the few significant 
figures.
2.5×1.25 = 3.125
Since 2.5 has two significant figures, 
the result should not have more than two 
significant figures, thus, it is 3.1.
While limiting the result to the required 
number of significant figures as done in the 
above mathematical operation, one has to 
keep in mind the following points for rounding 
off the numbers 
1.	
If the rightmost digit to be removed is 
more than 5, the preceding number is 
increased by one. For example, 1.386. If 
we have to remove 6, we have to round 
it to 1.39.
2.	
If the rightmost digit to be removed is 
less than 5, the preceding number is not 
changed. For example, 4.334 if 4 is to 
be removed, then the result is rounded 
upto 4.33.
3.	
If the rightmost digit to be removed is 5, 
then the preceding number is not changed 
if it is an even number but it is increased 
by one if it is an odd number. For example, 
if 6.35 is to be rounded by removing 5, we 
have to increase 3 to 4 giving 6.4 as the 
result. However, if 6.25 is to be rounded 
off it is rounded off to 6.2.
1.4.3	 Dimensional Analysis
Often while calculating, there is a need to 
convert units from one system to the other. 
The method used to accomplish this is called 
factor label method or unit factor method 
or dimensional analysis. This is illustrated 
below.
Example
A piece of metal is 3 inch (represented by in) 
long. What is its length in cm?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 14 :
 14
chemistry
Solution
We know that 1 in = 2.54 cm
From this equivalence, we can write 
Thus, 
1
2 54
in
cm
.
 equals 1 and 2 54
1
.
cm
in
 
also equals 1. Both of these are called unit 
factors. If some number is multiplied by these 
unit factors (i.e., 1), it will not be affected 
otherwise.
Say, the 3 in given above is multiplied by 
the unit factor. So,
3 in = 3 in × 2 54
1
.
cm
in
 = 3 × 2.54 cm = 7.62 cm
Now, the unit factor by which multiplication 
is to be done is that unit factor ( 2 54
1
.
cm
in
 in 
the above case) which gives the desired units 
i.e., the numerator should have that part 
which  is required in the desired result.
It should also be noted in the above 
example that units can be handled just like 
other numerical part. It can be cancelled, 
divided, multiplied, squared, etc. Let us study 
one more example.
Example 
A jug contains 2L of milk. Calculate the 
volume of the milk in m3.
Solution
Since 1 L = 1000 cm3
and 1m = 100 cm, which gives 
	
1
100
1
100
1
m
cm
cm
m
=
=
To get m3 from the above unit factors, the 
first unit factor is taken and it is cubed.
	
1
100
1
10
1
1
3
3
6
3
3
m
cm
m
cm






	
Now 2 L = 2 ×1000 cm3
1
2 54
1
2 54
1
in
cm
cm
in
.
.
=
=
The above is multiplied by the unit factor
2
1000
1
10
2
10
2
10
3
3
6
3
3
3
3
3






cm
m
cm
m
m
Example
How many seconds are there in 2 days?
Solution
Here, we know 1 day = 24 hours (h)
or 1
24
1
24
1
day
h
h
day
=
=
then, 1h = 60 min
or 
1
60
1
60
1
h
h
min
min
=
=
so, for converting 2 days to seconds,
i.e., 2 days – – – – – – = – – – seconds
The unit factors can be multiplied in  
series in one step only as follows:
2
24
1
60
1
60
1
day
h
day
h
s
×
×
×
min
min
	
= 2 × 24 × 60 × 60 s
	
= 172800 s
1.5	
Laws of Chemical 
Combinations
The combination of elements 
to form compounds is 
governed by the following five 
basic laws.
1.5.1	 Law of Conservation 
of Mass 
This law was put forth by Antoine Lavoisier 
in 1789. He performed careful experimental 
studies for combustion reactions and reached 
to the conclusion that in all physical and 
chemical changes, there is no net change in 
mass duting the process. Hence, he reached 
to the conclusion that matter can neither be 
created nor destroyed. This is called ‘Law 
of Conservation of Mass’. This law formed 
the basis for several later developments in 
chemistry. Infact, this was the result of exact 
measurement of masses of reactants and 
products, and carefully planned experiments 
performed by Lavoisier.
Antoine Lavoisier
(1743–1794)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 15 :
 15
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry
are produced in a chemical 
reaction they do so in a 
simple ratio by volume, 
provided all gases are at 
the same temperature and 
pressure.
Thus, 100 mL of hydrogen 
combine with 50 mL of 
oxygen to give 100 mL of 
water vapour.
Hydrogen  + Oxygen →  Water
100 mL          50 mL        100 mL
Thus, the volumes of hydrogen and 
oxygen which combine (i.e., 100 mL and  
50 mL) bear a simple ratio of 2:1.
Gay Lussac’s discovery of integer ratio 
in volume relationship is actually the law of 
definite proportions by volume. The law of 
definite proportions, stated earlier, was with 
respect to mass. The Gay Lussac’s law was 
explained properly by the work of Avogadro 
in 1811.
1.5.5	 Avogadro’s Law
In 1811, Avogadro proposed that equal 
volumes of all gases at the same temperature 
and pressure should contain equal number 
of molecules. Avogadro made a distinction 
between atoms and molecules which is 
quite understandable in present times. If 
we consider again the reaction of hydrogen 
and oxygen to produce water, we see that 
two volumes of hydrogen combine with one 
volume of oxygen to give two volumes of water 
without leaving any unreacted oxygen.
Note that in the Fig. 1.9 (Page 16) each 
box contains equal number of 
molecules. In fact, Avogadro 
could explain the above result 
by considering the molecules 
to be polyatomic. If hydrogen 
and oxygen were considered 
as diatomic as recognised 
now, then the above results 
are easily understandable. 
However, Dalton and others 
believed at that time that 
atoms of the same kind 
1.5.2  Law of Definite Proportions
This law was given by, a 
French chemist, Joseph 
Proust. He stated that a given 
compound always contains 
exactly the same proportion of 
elements by weight.
Proust worked with two 
samples of cupric carbonate 
— one of which was of natural 
origin and the other was synthetic. He found 
that the composition of elements present in it 
was same for both the samples as shown below:
% of 
copper
% of 
carbon
% of 
oxygen
Natural Sample
Synthetic Sample
51.35
51.35
9.74
9.74
38.91
38.91
Thus, he concluded that irrespective of the 
source, a given compound always contains 
same elements combined together in the same 
proportion by mass. The validity of this law 
has been confirmed by various experiments. 
It is sometimes also referred to as Law of 
Definite Composition.
1.5.3	 Law of Multiple Proportions
This law was proposed by Dalton in 1803. 
According to this law, if two elements can 
combine to form more than one compound, 
the masses of one element that combine with 
a fixed mass of the other element, are in the 
ratio of small whole numbers.
For example, hydrogen combines with 
oxygen to form two compounds, namely, water 
and hydrogen peroxide.
Hydrogen + Oxygen → Water
	
2g              16g            18g
Hydrogen + Oxygen → Hydrogen Peroxide
	
2g              32g             34g
Here, the masses of oxygen (i.e., 16 g and 32 g), 
which combine with a fixed mass of hydrogen 
(2g) bear a simple ratio, i.e., 16:32 or 1: 2.
1.5.4	 Gay 
Lussac’s 
Law 
of 
Gaseous  
	
Volumes
This law was given by Gay Lussac in 1808. 
He observed that when gases combine or 
Joseph Proust
(1754–1826)
Joseph Louis
Gay Lussac
Lorenzo Romano
Amedeo Carlo 
Avogadro di 
Quareqa edi 
Carreto
(1776–1856)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 16 :
 16
chemistry
cannot combine and molecules of oxygen or 
hydrogen containing two atoms did not exist. 
Avogadro’s proposal was published in the 
French Journal de Physique. In spite of being 
correct, it did not gain much support.
After about 50 years, in 1860, the first 
international conference on chemistry was 
held in Karlsruhe, Germany, to resolve 
various ideas. At the meeting, Stanislao 
Cannizaro presented a sketch of a course of 
chemical philosophy, which emphasised on 
the importance of Avogadro’s work.
1.6	
Dalton’s Atomic Theory
Although the origin of the idea that matter is 
composed of small indivisible particles called 
‘a-tomio’ (meaning, indivisible), dates back 
to the time of Democritus, 
a Greek Philosopher (460–
370 BC), it again started 
emerging as a result of several 
experimental studies which 
led to the laws mentioned 
above.
In 1808, Dalton published 
‘A New System of Chemical 
Philosophy’, in which he 
proposed the following :
1.	 Matter consists of indivisible atoms.
2.	 All atoms of a given element have identical 
properties, including identical mass. Atoms 
of different elements differ in mass.
3.	 Compounds are formed when atoms of 
different elements combine in a fixed ratio.
4.	 Chemical reactions involve reorganisation 
of atoms. These are neither created nor 
destroyed in a chemical reaction.
Dalton’s theory could explain the laws 
of chemical combination. However, it could 
not explain the laws of gaseous volumes. It 
could not provide the reason for combining 
of atoms, which was answered later by other 
scientists.
1.7	
Atomic and Molecular Masses
After having some idea about the terms 
atoms and molecules, it is appropriate here 
to understand what do we mean by atomic 
and molecular masses.
1.7.1	 Atomic Mass 
The atomic mass or the mass of an atom is 
actually very-very small because atoms are 
extremely small. Today, we have sophisticated 
techniques e.g., mass spectrometry for 
determining the atomic masses fairly 
accurately. But in the nineteenth century, 
scientists could determine the mass of one 
atom relative to another by experimental 
means, as has been mentioned earlier. 
Hydrogen, being the lightest atom was 
arbitrarily assigned a mass of 1 (without 
any units) and other elements were assigned 
masses relative to it. However, the present 
system of atomic masses is based on 
carbon-12 as the standard and has been 
agreed upon in 1961. Here, Carbon-12 is 
one of the isotopes of carbon and can be 
represented as 12C. In this system, 12C is 
assigned a mass of exactly 12 atomic mass 
unit (amu) and masses of all other atoms are 
given relative to this standard. One atomic 
mass unit is defined as a mass exactly equal 
to one-twelfth of the mass of one carbon – 12 
atom.
John Dalton
(1776–1884)
Fig. 1.9  Two volumes of hydrogen react with one volume of oxygen to give two volumes of water vapour
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 17 :
 17
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry
And 1 amu = 1.66056×10–24 g
Mass of an atom of hydrogen 
	
= 1.6736×10–24 g
Thus, in terms of amu, the mass 
of hydrogen atom     = 
                                = 1.0078 amu 
                                = 1.0080 amu
Similarly, the mass of oxygen - 16 (16O) 
atom would be 15.995 amu.
At present, ‘amu’ has been replaced by 
‘u’, which is known as unified mass.
When we use atomic masses of elements 
in calculations, we actually use average 
atomic masses of elements, which are 
explained below.
1.7.2	 Average Atomic Mass
Many naturally occurring elements exist 
as more than one isotope. When we take 
into account the existence of these isotopes 
and their relative abundance (per cent 
occurrence), the average atomic mass of 
that element can be computed. For example,  
carbon has the following three isotopes with 
relative abundances and masses as shown 
against each of them.
Isotope
Relative 
Abundance 
(%)
Atomic Mass 
(amu)
12C
13C
14C
98.892
1.108
2 ×10–10
12
13.00335
14.00317
From the above data, the average atomic 
mass of carbon will come out to be:
(0.98892) (12 u) + (0.01108) (13.00335 u) + 
(2 × 10–12) (14.00317 u) = 12.011 u
Similarly, average atomic masses for 
other elements can be calculated. In the 
periodic table of elements, the atomic masses 
mentioned for different elements actually 
represent their average atomic masses.
1.7.3	 Molecular Mass
Molecular mass is the sum of atomic masses 
of the elements present in a molecule. It is 
obtained by multiplying the atomic mass 
of each element by the number of its atoms 
and adding them together. For example, 
molecular mass of methane, which contains 
one carbon atom and four hydrogen atoms, 
can be obtained as follows:
Molecular mass of methane,  
(CH4) = (12.011 u) + 4 (1.008 u) 
= 16.043 u
Similarly, molecular mass of water (H2O)
= 2 × atomic mass of hydrogen + 1× atomic 	
mass of oxygen
= 2 (1.008 u) + 16.00 u
= 18.02 u
1.7.4	 Formula Mass
Some substances, such as sodium chloride, 
do not contain discrete molecules as their 
constituent units. In such compounds, 
positive (sodium ion) and negative (chloride ion) 
entities are arranged in a three-dimensional 
structure, as shown in Fig. 1.10.
It may be noted that in sodium chloride, 
one Na+ ion is surrounded by six Cl– ion and 
vice-versa.
The formula, such as NaCl, is used to 
calculate the formula mass instead of 
molecular mass as in the solid state sodium 
chloride does not exist as a single entity.
Fig. 1.10  Packing of  Na+ and Cl– ions 
in sodium chloride
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 18 :
 18
chemistry
This number of entities in 1 mol is so 
important that it is given a separate name and 
symbol. It is known as ‘Avogadro constant’, 
or Avogadro number denoted by NA in honour 
of Amedeo Avogadro. To appreciate the 
largeness of this number, let us write it with 
all zeroes without using any powers of ten. 
602213670000000000000000
Hence, so many entities (atoms, molecules or 
any other particle) constitute one mole of a 
particular substance.
We can, therefore, say that 1 mol of hydrogen 
atoms = 6.022 × 1023 atoms
1 mol of water molecules = 6.022 × 1023 water 
molecules
1 mol of sodium chloride = 6.022 ×1023 formula 
units of sodium chloride
Having defined the mole, it is easier to 
know the mass of one mole of a substance 
or the constituent entities. The mass of one 
mole of a substance in grams is called its  
molar mass. The molar mass in grams is 
numerically equal to atomic/molecular/
formula mass in u.
Molar mass of water  = 18.02 g mol–1
Molar mass of sodium chloride = 58.5 g mol–1
1.9	
Percentage Composition
So far, we were dealing with the number of 
entities present in a given sample. But many 
a time, information regarding the percentage 
of a particular element present in a compound 
is required. Suppose, an unknown or new 
compound is given to you, the first question 
Fig. 1.11  One mole of various substances
Thus, the formula mass of sodium chloride is 
atomic mass of sodium + atomic mass of chlorine
= 23.0 u + 35.5 u = 58.5 u
Problem 1.1
Calculate the molecular mass of glucose 
(C6H12O6) molecule.
Solution
Molecular mass of glucose (C6H12O6) 
= 6 (12.011 u) + 12 (1.008 u) +
                                        6 (16.00 u)
= (72.066 u) + (12.096 u) +
                                      (96.00 u)
=  180.162 u
1.8	
Mole concept and Molar Masses
Atoms and molecules are extremely small 
in size and their numbers in even a small 
amount of any substance is really very large. 
To handle such large numbers, a unit of 
convenient magnitude is required.
Just as we denote one dozen for 12 items, 
score for 20 items, gross for 144 items, we 
use the idea of mole to count entities at the 
microscopic level (i.e., atoms, molecules, 
particles, electrons, ions, etc). 
In SI system, mole (symbol, mol) was 
introduced as seventh base quantity for the 
amount of a substance.
The mole, symbol mol, is the SI unit of 
amount of substance. One mole contains 
exactly 6.02214076 × 1023 elementary entities. 
This number is the fixed numerical value of 
the Avogadro constant, NA, when expressed 
in the unit mol–1 and is called the Avogadro 
number. The amount of substance, symbol 
n, of a system is a measure of the number of 
specified elementary entities. An elementary 
entity may be an atom, a molecule, an ion, 
an electron, any other particle or specified 
group of particles. It may be emphasised that 
the mole of a substance always contains the 
same number of entities, no matter what the 
substance may be. In order to determine this 
number precisely, the mass of a carbon–12 
atom was determined by a mass spectrometer 
and found to be equal to 1.992648 × 10–23 g. 
Knowing that one mole of carbon weighs 12 g, 
the number of atoms in it is equal to:
12
1 992648
10
12
23
12
g
mol
C
g
Catom
/
.
/




6 0221367
1023
.
atoms/mol
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 19 :
 19
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry
you would ask is:  what is its formula or what 
are its constituents and in what ratio are they 
present in the given compound? For known 
compounds also, such information provides a 
check  whether the given sample contains the 
same percentage of elements as present in a 
pure sample. In other words, one can check 
the purity of a given sample by analysing this 
data.
Let us understand it by taking the example 
of water (H2O). Since water contains hydrogen 
and oxygen, the percentage composition of 
both these elements can be calculated as 
follows:
Mass % of an element = 
mass of that element in the compound 
 100
molar mass of th
×
e compound
Molar mass of water	   = 18.02 g
Mass % of hydrogen	   = 
	
                =  11.18 
Mass % of oxygen	       =  16.00
18.02
100
×
	
                 =   88.79
Let us take one more example. What is the 
percentage of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen 
in ethanol?
Molecular formula of ethanol is:  C2H5OH	
Molar mass of ethanol is:
(2×12.01 + 6×1.008 + 16.00) g =  46.068 g
Mass per cent of carbon 	
	
= 24.02g
46.068g
100
×
 = 52.14%
Mass per cent of hydrogen	
	
= 6.048g
46.068g
100
×
 = 13.13%
Mass per cent of oxygen	
	
= 16.00g
46.068g
100
×
 = 34.73%
After understanding the calculation of 
per cent of mass, let us now see what 
information can be obtained from the 
per cent composition data.
1.9.1	 Empirical Formula for Molecular  
	
Formula
An empirical formula represents the simplest 
whole number ratio of various atoms present 
in a compound, whereas, the molecular 
formula shows the exact number of different 
types of atoms present in a molecule of a 
compound.
If the mass per cent of various elements 
present in a compound is known, its empirical 
formula can be determined. Molecular formula 
can  further be obtained if the molar mass is 
known. The following example illustrates  
this sequence.
Problem 1.2
A compound contains 4.07% hydrogen, 
24.27% carbon and 71.65% chlorine. 
Its molar mass is 98.96 g. What are its 
empirical and molecular formulas?
Solution
Step 1. Conversion of mass per cent 
to grams
Since we are having mass per cent, it is 
convenient to use 100 g of the compound 
as the starting material. Thus, in the  
100 g sample of the above compound, 
4.07g hydrogen, 24.27g carbon and 
71.65g chlorine are present.
Step 2. Convert into number moles of 
each element
Divide the masses obtained above by 
respective atomic masses of various 
elements. This gives the number of 
moles of constituent elements in the 
compound
Moles of hydrogen = 4.07 g
1.008g
 = 4.04 
Moles of carbon  = 24.27 g
g
12 01
2 021
.
.
=
Moles of chlorine  = 71.65g
g
35 453
2 021
.
.
=
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 20 :
 20
chemistry
equation of a given reaction. Let us consider 
the combustion of methane. A balanced 
equation for this reaction is as given below:
CH4 (g) + 2O2 (g) → CO2 (g) + 2 H2O (g)
Here, methane and dioxygen are called 
reactants and carbon dioxide and water are 
called products. Note that all the reactants 
and the products are gases in the above 
reaction and this has been indicated by 
letter (g) in the brackets next to its formula. 
Similarly, in case of solids and liquids, (s) and 
(l) are written respectively.
The coefficients 2 for O2 and H2O are 
called stoichiometric coefficients. Similarly 
the coefficient for CH4 and CO2 is one in each 
case. They represent the number of molecules 
(and moles as well) taking part in the reaction 
or formed in the reaction.
Thus, according to the above chemical 
reaction,
• 
One mole of CH4(g) reacts with two moles 
of O2(g) to give one mole of CO2(g) and  
two moles of H2O(g)
• 
One molecule of CH4(g) reacts with  
2 molecules of O2(g) to give one molecule 
of CO2(g) and 2 molecules of H2O(g)
• 
22.7 L of CH4(g) reacts with 45.4 L of O2 
(g) to give 22.7 L of CO2 (g) and 45.4 L of 
H2O(g)
• 
16 g of CH4 (g) reacts with 2×32 g of O2 
(g) to give 44 g of CO2 (g) and 2×18 g of 
H2O (g).
From these relationships, the given data can 
be interconverted as follows:
mass 
Mass
Volume
Density
=
1.10.1	Limiting Reagent
Many a time, reactions are carried out with 
the amounts of reactants that are different 
than the amounts as required by a balanced 
chemical reaction. In such situations, one 
reactant is in more amount than the amount 
required by balanced chemical reaction. The 
1.10	 Stoichiometry and	
	
Stoichiometric Calculations
The word ‘stoichiometry’ is derived from 
two Greek words — stoicheion (meaning, 
element) and metron (meaning, measure). 
Stoichiometry,  thus, deals with the calculation 
of masses (sometimes volumes also) of the 
reactants and the products involved in a 
chemical reaction. Before understanding how 
to calculate the amounts of reactants required 
or the products produced in a chemical 
reaction, let us study what information 
is available from the balanced chemical 
Step 3. Divide each of the mole values 
obtained above by the smallest number 
amongst them
Since 2.021 is smallest value, division 
by it gives a ratio of 2:1:1 for H:C:Cl.
In case the ratios are not whole numbers, 
then they may be converted into whole 
number by multiplying by the suitable 
coefficient.
Step 4. Write down the empirical 
formula by mentioning the numbers 
after writing the symbols of respective 
elements
CH2Cl  is, thus, the empirical formula 
of the above compound.
Step 5. Writing molecular formula
(a) Determine empirical formula mass by 
adding the atomic masses of various 
atoms present in the empirical formula.
For CH2Cl, empirical formula mass is 
12.01 + (2 ×1.008) + 35.453
= 49.48 g
(b) Divide Molar mass by empirical 
formula mass
                                             = 2 = (n)
(c) Multiply empirical formula by n 
obtained above to get the molecular 
formula
Empirical formula = CH2Cl, n = 2. Hence 
molecular formula is C2H4Cl2.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 21 :
 21
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry
reactant which is present in the least amount 
gets consumed after sometime and after that 
further reaction does not take place whatever 
be the amount of the other reactant. Hence, 
the reactant, which gets consumed first, 
limits the amount of product formed and is, 
therefore, called the limiting reagent.
In performing stoichiometric calculations, 
this aspect is also to be kept in mind.
1.10.2	Reactions in Solutions
A majority of reactions in the laboratories 
are carried out in solutions. Therefore, it is 
important to understand as how the amount 
of substance is expressed when it is present in 
the solution. The concentration of a solution 
or the amount of substance present in its 
given volume can be expressed in any of the 
following ways.
1.	 Mass per cent or weight per cent (w/w %)
2.	 Mole fraction
3.	 Molarity
4.	 Molality
Let us now study each one of them in 
detail.
Balancing a chemical equation
According to the law of conservation of mass, a balanced chemical equation has the same number of 
atoms of each element on both sides of the equation. Many chemical equations can be balanced by 
trial and error. Let us take the reactions of a few metals and non-metals with oxygen to give oxides 
	 	
4 Fe(s)  +  3O2(g)  → 2Fe2O3(s)	 	
(a) balanced equation
	 	
2 Mg(s)  +  O2(g)  → 2MgO(s)	
	
(b) balanced equation
	 	
P4(s)   +  O2 (g)  → P4O10(s)	
	
(c) unbalanced equation
Equations (a) and (b) are balanced, since there are same number of metal and oxygen atoms on 
each side of the equations. However equation (c) is not balanced. In this equation, phosphorus 
atoms are balanced but not the oxygen atoms. To balance it, we must place the coefficient 5 on 
the left of oxygen on the left side of the equation to balance the oxygen atoms appearing on the 
right side of the equation.
	 	
P4(s)  +  5O2(g)  → P4O10(s)	
	
balanced equation          
Now, let us take combustion of propane, C3H8. This equation can be balanced in steps.
Step 1 Write down the correct formulas of reactants and products. Here, propane and oxygen are 
reactants, and carbon dioxide and water are products.
	 	
C3H8(g)  +  O2(g) → CO2 (g) + H2O(l)   unbalanced equation
Step 2 Balance the number of C atoms:  Since 3 carbon atoms are in the reactant, therefore, three 
CO2 molecules are required on the right side.
	     	
C3H8 (g)  +  O2 (g) → 3CO2 (g) + H2O (l)
Step 3 Balance the number of H atoms: on the left there are 8 hydrogen atoms in the reactants 
however, each molecule of water has two hydrogen atoms, so four molecules of water will be 
required for eight hydrogen atoms on the right side.
	 	
C3H8  (g) +O2 (g)  → 3CO2  (g)+4H2O (l)
Step 4 Balance the number of O atoms:  There are 10 oxygen atoms on the right side (3 × 2 = 6 in 
CO2 and 4×1= 4 in water).  Therefore, five O2 molecules are needed to supply the required 10 CO2 
and 4×1= 4 in water).  Therefore, five O2 molecules are needed to supply the required 10 oxygen 
atoms.
	 	
C3H8 (g) +5O2   (g)  →  3CO2 (g) + 4H2O (l)
Step 5 Verify that the number of atoms of each element is balanced in the final equation. The 
equation shows three carbon atoms, eight hydrogen atoms, and 10 oxygen atoms on each side.
All equations that have correct formulas for all reactants and products can be balanced. Always 
remember that subscripts in formulas of reactants and products cannot be changed to balance 
an equation.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 22 :
 22
chemistry
Problem 1.3
Calculate the amount of water (g) 
produced by the combustion of 16 g 
of methane.
Solution
The balanced equation for the 
combustion of methane is :
CH4 (g) + 2O2 (g) → CO2 (g) + 2H2O (g)
(i) 16 g of CH4   corresponds to one mole.
(ii) From the above equation, 1 mol of  
CH4 (g) gives 2 mol of H2O (g). 
2 mol of water (H2O) = 2×(2+16)  
	 	
              	
 = 2×18 = 36 g
1 mol H2O = 18 g H2O ⇒18g H O
1mol H O
2
2
 = 1
Hence, 2 mol H2O×
18g H O
1mol H O
2
2
 
             = 2×18 g H2O = 36 g H2O
Problem 1.4
How many moles of methane are 
required to produce 22g CO2 (g) after 
combustion?
Solution
According to the chemical equation,
CH4 (g) + 2O2 (g) → CO2 (g) + 2H2O (g)
44g CO2 (g) is obtained from 16 g CH4 (g).
[∴1 mol CO2(g) is obtained from 1 mol 
of CH4(g)]
Number of moles of CO2 (g) 
= 22 g CO2 (g) ×1
44
2
2
molCO
g
gCO
g


= 0.5 mol CO2 (g)
Hence, 0.5 mol CO2 (g) would be 
obtained from 0.5 mol CH4 (g) or 0.5 mol 
of CH4 (g) would be required to produce 
22 g  CO2 (g).
Problem 1.5
50.0 kg of N2 (g) and 10.0 kg of H2 (g) 
are mixed to produce NH3 (g). Calculate 
the amount of NH3 (g) formed. Identify  
the limiting reagent in the production of 
NH3 in this situation.
Solution
A balanced equation for the above 
reaction is written as follows :
Calculation of moles :  
Number of moles of N2  
= 50 0
1000
1
1
28 0
2
2
2
2
2
.
.
kg N
g N
kg N
mol N
g N
×
×
= 17.86×102  mol
Number of moles of H2 
= 10 00
1000
1
1
2 016
2
2
2
2
2
.
.
kg H
g H
kg H
mol H
g H
×
×
= 4.96 × 103 mol
According to the above equation, 1 
mol N2 (g) requires 3 mol H2 (g), for the 
reaction. Hence, for 17.86×102 mol of 
N2, the moles of H2 (g) required would be 
17 86 10
3
1
2
2
2
2
.




mol N
mol H
g
mol N
g  
= 5.36 × 103 mol H2
But we have only 4.96×103 mol H2. 
Hence, dihydrogen is the limiting 
reagent in this case. So, NH3(g) would 
be formed only from that amount of 
available dihydrogen i.e., 4.96 × 103 mol
Since 3 mol H2(g) gives 2 mol NH3(g)
4.96 ×103 mol H2 (g) × 2
3
3
2
mol NH
g
mol H
g


 
= 3.30 × 103 mol NH3 (g)
3.30 × 103 mol NH3 (g) is obtained. 
If they are to be converted to grams, it 
is done as follows :
1 mol NH3 (g) = 17.0 g NH3
 (g)
3.30 ×103 mol NH3 (g) ×17 0
1
3
3
. g NH
g
mol NH
g


2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 23 :
 23
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry
3.  Molarity
It is the most widely used unit and is denoted 
by M. It is defined as the number of moles of 
the solute in 1 litre of the solution. Thus,
Molarity (M) =
No. of moles of solute
 of solution in litres
Volume
Suppose, we have 1 M solution of a 
substance, say NaOH, and we want to prepare 
a 0.2 M solution from it.
1 M NaOH means 1 mol of NaOH present 
in 1 litre of the solution. For 0.2 M solution, 
we require 0.2 moles of NaOH dissolved in 
1 litre solution.
Hence, for making 0.2M solution from 1M 
solution, we have to take that volume of 1M 
NaOH solution, which contains 0.2 mol of NaOH 
and dilute the solution with water to 1 litre.
Now, how much volume of concentrated 
(1M) NaOH solution be taken, which contains 
0.2 moles of NaOH can be calculated as follows:
If 1 mol is present in 1L or 1000 mL 
solution
then, 0.2 mol is present in 
	
1000
1
0 2
mL
mol
mol solution
× .
	
 = 200 mL solution
Thus, 200 mL of 1M NaOH are taken and 
enough water is added to dilute it to make it 1 litre.
In fact for such calculations, a general 
formula, M1×V1 =  M2 × V2 where M and V are 
molarity and volume, respectively, can be used. 
In this case, M1 is equal to 0.2M; V1 = 1000 
mL and, M2 = 1.0M; V2 is to be calculated. 
Substituting the values in the formula:
0.2 M × 1000 mL = 1.0 M × V2
Note that the number of moles of solute 
(NaOH) was 0.2 in 200 mL and it has remained 
the same, i.e.,  0.2 even after dilution ( in 1000 
mL) as we have changed just the amount 
of solvent (i.e., water) and have not done 
anything with respect to NaOH. But keep in 
mind the concentration.
1.  Mass per cent
It is obtained by using the following relation:
Problem 1.6
A solution is prepared by adding 2 g of a 
substance A to 18 g of water. Calculate 
the mass per cent of the solute.
Solution
2.  Mole Fraction
It is the ratio of number of moles of a 
particular component to the total number 
of moles of the solution. If a substance ‘A’ 
dissolves in substance ‘B’ and their number 
of moles are nA and nB, respectively, then the 
mole fractions of A and B are given as: 
= 3.30×103×17 g NH3 (g)
= 56.1×103 g NH3
= 56.1 kg NH3
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 24 :
 24
chemistry
Summary
Chemistry, as we understand it today is not a very old discipline. People in ancient India, 
already had the knowledge of many scientific phenomenon much before the advent of 
modern science. They applied the knowledge in various walks of life. 
The study of chemistry is very important as its domain encompasses every sphere 
of life. Chemists study the properties and structure of substances and the changes 
undergone by them. All substances contain matter, which can exist in three states – 
solid, liquid or gas. The constituent particles are held in different ways in these states 
of matter and they exhibit their characteristic properties. Matter can also be classified 
into elements, compounds or mixtures. An element contains particles of only one type, 
which may be atoms or molecules. The compounds are formed where atoms of two or 
more elements combine in a fixed ratio to each other. Mixtures occur widely and many 
of the substances present around us are mixtures.
When the properties of a substance are studied, measurement is inherent. The 
quantification of properties requires a system of measurement and units in which the 
quantities are to be expressed. Many systems of measurement exist, of which the English 
Problem 1.8
The density of 3 M solution of NaCl is  
1.25 g mL–1. Calculate the molality of 
the solution.
Solution
M = 3 mol L–1
Mass of NaCl 
in 1 L solution  =   3 × 58.5  = 175.5 g
Mass of 
1L solution =  1000 × 1.25 = 1250 g
(since density = 1.25 g mL–1)
Mass of water in solution  = 1250 –75.5                    	
                                        =    1074.5 g
Molality = No. of moles of solute
 of solvent in kg
Mass
 
	
              = 
3 mol 
1 0745
.
kg  =   2.79 m
Often in a chemistry laboratory, a 
solution of a desired concentration is 
prepared by diluting a solution of known 
higher concentration. The solution of 
higher concentration is also known as 
stock solution. Note that the molality 
of a solution does not change with 
temperature since mass remains 
unaffected with temperature.
Problem 1.7
Calculate the molarity of NaOH in the 
solution prepared by dissolving its 4 g 
in enough water to form 250 mL of the 
solution.
Solution
Since molarity (M)
Note that molarity of a solution depends 
upon temperature because volume of a 
solution is temperature dependent.
4.  Molality
It is defined as the number of moles of solute 
present in 1 kg of solvent. It is denoted by m.
Thus, Molality (m) = No. of moles of solute
Mass of solvent in kg
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 25 :
 25
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry
and the Metric Systems are widely used. The scientific community, however, has agreed to 
have a uniform and common system throughout the world, which is abbreviated as SI units 
(International System of Units).
Since measurements involve recording of data, which are always associated with a certain 
amount of uncertainty, the proper handling of data obtained by measuring the quantities 
is very important. The measurements of quantities in chemistry are spread over a wide 
range of 10–31 to 10+23. Hence, a convenient system of expressing the numbers in scientific 
notation is used. The uncertainty is taken care of by specifying the number of significant 
figures, in which the observations are reported. The dimensional analysis helps to express 
the measured quantities in different systems of units. Hence, it is possible to interconvert 
the results from one system of units to another.
The combination of different atoms is governed by basic laws of chemical combination 
— these being the Law of Conservation of Mass, Law of Definite Proportions, Law of 
Multiple Proportions, Gay Lussac’s Law of Gaseous Volumes and Avogadro Law. All 
these laws led to the Dalton’s atomic theory, which states that atoms are building blocks 
of matter. The atomic mass of an element is expressed relative to 12C isotope of carbon, 
which has an exact value of 12u. Usually, the atomic mass used for an element is the 
average atomic mass obtained by taking into account the natural abundance of different 
isotopes of that element. The molecular mass of a molecule is obtained by taking sum of 
the atomic masses of different atoms present in a molecule. The molecular formula can be 
calculated by determining the mass per cent of different elements present in a compound 
and its molecular mass. 
The number of atoms, molecules or any other particles present in a given system are 
expressed in the terms of  Avogadro constant (6.022 × 1023). This is known as 1 mol of the 
respective particles or entities.
Chemical reactions represent the chemical changes undergone by different elements and 
compounds. A balanced chemical equation provides a lot of information. The coefficients 
indicate the molar ratios and the respective number of particles taking part in a particular 
reaction. The quantitative study of the reactants required or the products formed is called 
stoichiometry. Using stoichiometric calculations, the amount of one or more reactant(s) 
required to produce a particular amount of product can be determined and vice-versa. The 
amount of substance present in a given volume of a solution is expressed in number of ways, 
e.g., mass per cent, mole fraction, molarity and molality.
exerciseS
1.1	
Calculate the molar mass of the following:
	
(i) H2O  (ii)  CO2 (iii) CH4
1.2	
Calculate the mass per cent of different elements present in sodium sulphate 
(Na2SO4).
1.3	
Determine the empirical formula of an oxide of iron, which has 69.9% iron and 
30.1% dioxygen by mass.
1.4	
Calculate the amount of carbon dioxide that could be produced when
	
(i)	
1 mole of carbon is burnt in air.
	
(ii)	
1 mole of carbon is burnt in 16 g of dioxygen.
	
(iii)	
2 moles of carbon are burnt in 16 g of dioxygen.
1.5	
Calculate the mass of sodium acetate (CH3COONa) required to make 500 mL of  
0.375 molar aqueous solution. Molar mass of sodium acetate is 82.0245 g mol–1.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 26 :
 26
chemistry
1.6	
Calculate the concentration of nitric acid in moles per litre in a sample which has 
a density, 1.41 g mL–1 and the mass per cent of nitric acid in it being 69%.
1.7	
How much copper can be obtained from 100 g of copper sulphate (CuSO4)?
1.8	
Determine the molecular formula of an oxide of iron, in which the mass per cent of 
iron and oxygen are 69.9 and 30.1, respectively.
1.9	
Calculate the atomic mass (average) of chlorine using the following data:
	
	
	
	
% Natural Abundance		
Molar Mass
	
35Cl	
	
	
	
75.77	 	
	
  34.9689
	
37Cl	
	
	
	
24.23	 	
	
  36.9659
1.10	
In three moles of ethane (C2H6), calculate the following:
	
(i)	
Number of moles of carbon atoms.
	
(ii)	
Number of moles of hydrogen atoms.
	
(iii)	
Number of molecules of ethane.
1.11	
What is the concentration of sugar (C12H22O11) in mol L–1 if its 20 g are dissolved in 
enough water to make a final volume up to 2L?
1.12	
If the density of methanol is 0.793 kg L–1, what is its volume needed for making 2.5 
L of its 0.25 M solution?
1.13	
Pressure is determined as force per unit area of the surface. The SI unit of pressure, 
pascal is as shown below:
	
1Pa  =  1N m–2
	
If mass of air at sea level is 1034 g cm–2, calculate the pressure in pascal.
1.14	
What is the SI unit of mass? How is it defined?
1.15	
Match the following prefixes with their multiples:
	
	
Prefixes 
Multiples
	
(i)	
micro	 	
106
	
(ii)	
deca	
	
109
	
(iii)	
mega	
	
10–6
	
(iv)	
giga	
	
10–15
	
(v)	
femto	 	
10
1.16	
What do you mean by significant figures?
1.17	
A sample of drinking water was found to be severely contaminated with chloroform, 
CHCl3, supposed to be carcinogenic in nature. The level of contamination was 15 
ppm (by mass).
	
(i)	
Express this in per cent by mass.
	
(ii)	
Determine the molality of chloroform in the water sample.
1.18	
Express the following in the scientific notation:
	
(i)	
0.0048	
	
(ii)	
234,000	
	
(iii)	
8008	
	
(iv)	
500.0	
	
(v)	
6.0012	
1.19	
How many significant figures are present in the following?
	
(i)	
0.0025	
	
(ii)	
208	
	
	
(iii)	
5005	
	
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 27 :
 27
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry
	
(iv)	
126,000	
	
(v)	
500.0	
	
(vi)	
2.0034	
1.20	
Round up the following upto three significant figures:
	
(i)	
34.216	
	
(ii)	
10.4107	
	
(iii)	
0.04597	
	
(iv)	
2808	
1.21	
The following data are obtained when dinitrogen and dioxygen react together to form 
different compounds:
	
	
Mass of dinitrogen	
Mass of dioxygen
	
(i)	
	
14 g	
	
	
16 g
	
(ii)	
	
14 g	
	
	
32 g
	
(iii)	
	
28 g	
	
	
32 g
	
(iv)	
	
28 g	
	
	
80 g
(a)	
Which law of chemical combination is obeyed by the above experimental data? Give 
its statement.
(b)	
Fill in the blanks in the following conversions:
	
(i)	
1 km = ...................... mm = ...................... pm
	
(ii)	
1 mg = ...................... kg = ...................... ng
	
(iii)	
1 mL = ...................... L = ...................... dm3
1.22	
If the speed of light is 3.0 × 108 m s–1, calculate the distance covered by light in  
2.00 ns. 
1.23	
In a reaction
	
A + B2     AB2
	
Identify the limiting reagent, if any, in the following reaction mixtures.
	
(i)	
300 atoms of A + 200 molecules of B
	
(ii)	
2 mol A + 3 mol B
	
(iii)	
100 atoms of A + 100 molecules of B
	
(iv)	
5 mol A + 2.5 mol B
	
(v)	
2.5 mol A + 5 mol B
1.24	
Dinitrogen and dihydrogen react with each other to produce ammonia according to 
the following chemical equation:
	
N2 (g) + H2 (g)    2NH3 (g)
	
(i)	
Calculate the mass of ammonia produced if 2.00 × 103 g dinitrogen reacts 	
	
with 1.00 × 103 g of dihydrogen.
	
(ii)	
Will any of the two reactants remain unreacted?
	
(iii)	
If yes, which one and what would be its mass?
1.25	
How are 0.50 mol Na2CO3 and 0.50 M Na2CO3 different?
1.26	
If 10 volumes of dihydrogen gas reacts with five volumes of dioxygen gas, how many 
volumes of water vapour would be produced?
1.27	
Convert the following into basic units:
	
(i)	
28.7 pm	
	
(ii)	
15.15 pm	
	
(iii)	
25365 mg	
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 28 :
 28
chemistry
1.28	
Which one of the following will have the largest number of atoms?
	
(i)	
1 g Au (s)
	
(ii)	
1 g Na (s)
	
(iii)	
1 g Li (s)
	
(iv)	
1 g of Cl2(g)
1.29	
Calculate the molarity of a solution of ethanol in water, in which the mole fraction of 
ethanol is 0.040 (assume the density of water to be one).
1.30 	
What will be the mass of one 12C atom in g?
1.31	
How many significant figures should be present in the answer of the following 
calculations?
	
(i)	
0.02856 
 298.15 
 0.112
×
×
0 5785
.
	
(ii)	 5 × 5.364	
	
(iii)	
0.0125 + 0.7864 + 0.0215
1.32	
Use the data given in the following table to calculate the molar mass of naturally occuring 
argon isotopes:
	
Isotope	
	
Isotopic molar mass	 	
Abundance
	
36Ar	
	
	
35.96755 g mol–1	
	
0.337%	
	
38Ar	
	
	
37.96272 g mol–1	
	
0.063%
	
40Ar	
	
	
39.9624 g mol–1	
	
99.600%
1.33	
Calculate the number of atoms in each of the following (i) 52 moles of Ar (ii) 52 u of He 
(iii) 52 g of He.
1.34	
A welding fuel gas contains carbon and hydrogen only.  Burning a small sample of it in 
oxygen gives 3.38 g carbon dioxide, 0.690 g of water and no other products. A volume 
of 10.0 L (measured at STP) of this welding gas is found to weigh 11.6 g. Calculate  
(i) empirical formula, (ii) molar mass of the gas, and (iii) molecular formula.
1.35	
Calcium carbonate reacts with aqueous HCl to give CaCl2 and CO2 according to the 
reaction, CaCO3 (s) + 2 HCl (aq) → CaCl2 (aq) + CO2(g) + H2O(l)
      	
What mass of CaCO3 is required to react completely with 25 mL of 0.75 M HCl?
1.36	
Chlorine is prepared in the laboratory by treating manganese dioxide (MnO2) with 
aqueous hydrochloric acid according to the reaction
        	
4 HCl (aq) +  MnO2(s) → 2H2O (l) + MnCl2(aq) + Cl2 (g)
        	
How many grams of HCl react with 5.0 g of manganese dioxide?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 1 :
 The rich diversity of chemical behaviour of different 
elements can be traced to the differences in the internal 
structure of atoms of these elements.
Unit 2
structure of atom
After studying this unit you will be 
able to
•	
know about the discovery of 
electron, proton and neutron and 
their characteristics;
•	
describe Thomson, Rutherford 
and Bohr atomic models;
•	
understand the important features 
of the quantum mechanical model 
of atom;
•	
u n d e r s t a n d  n a t u r e  o f 
electromagnetic radiation and 
Planck’s quantum theory; 
•	
explain the photoelectric effect 
and describe features of atomic 
spectra;
•	
state the de Broglie relation and 
Heisenberg uncertainty principle; 
• 
define an atomic orbital in terms 
of quantum numbers;
•	
state aufbau principle, Pauli 
exclusion principle and Hund’s 
rule of maximum multiplicity; and
• 
write the electronic configurations 
of atoms.
The existence of atoms has been proposed since the time 
of early Indian and Greek philosophers (400 B.C.) who 
were of the view that atoms are the fundamental building 
blocks of matter. According to them, the continued 
subdivisions of matter would ultimately yield atoms 
which would not be further divisible. The word ‘atom’ 
has been derived from the Greek word ‘a-tomio’ which 
means ‘uncut-able’ or ‘non-divisible’. These earlier ideas 
were mere speculations and there was no way to test 
them experimentally. These ideas remained dormant  for 
a very long time and were revived again by scientists in 
the nineteenth century.
The atomic theory of matter was first proposed 
on a firm scientific basis by John Dalton, a British 
school teacher in 1808. His theory, called Dalton’s 
atomic theory, regarded the atom as the ultimate 
particle of matter (Unit 1). Dalton’s atomic theory was 
able to explain the law of conservation of mass, law of 
constant composition and law of multiple proportion 
very successfully. However, it failed to explain the results 
of many experiments, for example, it was known that 
substances like glass or ebonite when rubbed with silk 
or fur get electrically charged.
In this unit we start with the experimental observations 
made by scientists towards the end of nineteenth and 
beginning of twentieth century. These established that 
atoms are made of sub-atomic particles, i.e., electrons, 
protons and neutrons — a concept very different from 
that of Dalton. 
Objectives
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 2 :
 30
chemistry
2.1	
Discovery of Sub-atomic 
Particles
An insight into the structure of atom was 
obtained from the experiments on electrical 
discharge through gases. Before we discuss 
these results we need to keep in mind a 
basic rule regarding the behaviour of charged 
particles : “Like charges repel each other and 
unlike charges attract each other”. 
2.1.1 Discovery of Electron 
In 1830, Michael Faraday showed that if 
electricity is passed through a solution of an 
electrolyte, chemical reactions occurred at the 
electrodes, which resulted in the liberation 
and deposition of matter at the electrodes. 
He formulated certain laws which you will 
study in Class XII. These results suggested 
the particulate nature of electricity.
In mid 1850s many scientists mainly 
Faraday began to study electrical discharge 
in partially evacuated tubes, known as 
cathode ray discharge tubes. It is depicted 
in Fig. 2.1. A cathode ray tube is made of 
glass containing two thin pieces of metal, 
called electrodes, sealed in it. The electrical 
discharge through the gases could be 
observed only at very low pressures and at 
very high voltages. The pressure of different 
gases could be adjusted by evacuation of the 
glass tubes. When sufficiently high voltage 
is applied across the electrodes, current 
starts flowing through a stream of particles 
moving in the tube from the negative 
electrode (cathode) to the positive electrode 
(anode). These were called cathode rays or 
cathode ray particles. The flow of current 
from cathode to anode was further checked 
by making a hole in the anode and coating 
the tube behind anode with phosphorescent 
material zinc sulphide. When these rays, 
after passing through anode, strike the zinc 
sulphide coating, a bright spot is developed 
on the coating [Fig. 2.1(b)]. 
Fig. 2.1(a) A cathode ray discharge tube
Fig. 2.1(b) 	A cathode ray discharge tube with 
perforated anode
The results of these experiments are 
summarised below.
(i)	
The cathode rays start from cathode and 
move towards the anode.
(ii)	
These rays themselves are not visible 
but their behaviour can be observed 
with the help of certain kind of materials 
(fluorescent or phosphorescent) which 
glow when hit by them. Television 
picture tubes are cathode ray tubes 
and television pictures result due to 
fluorescence on the television screen 
coated with certain fluorescent or 
phosphorescent materials.
(iii)	 In the absence of electrical or magnetic 
field, these rays travel in straight lines 
(Fig. 2.2).
(iv)	
In the presence of electrical or magnetic 
field, the behaviour of cathode rays are 
similar to that expected from negatively 
charged particles, suggesting that 
the cathode rays consist of negatively 
charged particles, called electrons.
(v)	
The characteristics of cathode rays 
(electrons) do not depend upon the 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 3 :
 31
structure of atom
material of electrodes and the nature of 
the gas present in the cathode ray tube.
	
Thus, we can conclude that electrons are 
basic constituent of all the atoms.
2.1.2	 Charge to Mass Ratio of Electron
In 1897, British physicist J.J. Thomson 
measured the ratio of electrical charge (e) to 
the mass of electron (me ) by using cathode 
ray tube and applying electrical and magnetic 
field perpendicular to each other as well as 
to the path of electrons (Fig. 2.2). When only 
electric field is applied, the electrons deviate 
from their path and hit the cathode ray tube 
at point A (Fig. 2.2). Similarly when only 
magnetic field is applied, electron strikes 
the cathode ray tube at point C. By carefully 
balancing the electrical and magnetic field 
strength, it is possible to bring back the 
electron to the path which is followed in the 
absence of electric or magnetic field and they 
hit the screen at point B. Thomson argued 
that the amount of deviation of the particles 
from their path in the presence of electrical 
or magnetic field depends upon:
(i)	
the magnitude of the negative charge on 
the particle, greater the magnitude of 
the charge on the particle, greater is the 
interaction with the electric or magnetic 
field and thus greater is the deflection.
(ii)	
the mass of the particle — lighter the 
particle, greater the deflection.
(iii)	 the strength of the electrical or magnetic 
field — the deflection of electrons from its 
original path increases with the increase 
in the voltage across the electrodes, or 
the strength of the magnetic field.
By carrying out accurate measurements 
on the amount of deflections observed by 
the electrons on the electric field strength or 
magnetic field strength, Thomson was able to 
determine the value of e/me as:
 = 1.758820 × 1011 C kg–1                  (2.1)
Where me is the mass of the electron in kg 
and e is the magnitude of the charge on the 
electron in coulomb (C). Since electrons are 
negatively charged, the charge on electron 
is –e.
2.1.3 Charge on the Electron
R.A. Millikan (1868-1953) devised a method 
known as oil drop experiment (1906-14), 
to determine the charge on the electrons. 
He found the charge on the electron to be  
– 1.6 × 10–19 C. The present accepted value of 
electrical charge is – 1.602176 × 10–19 C. The 
mass of the  electron (me) was determined by 
combining these results with Thomson’s value 
of e/me ratio.
= 9.1094×10–31 kg                             (2.2)
Fig. 2.2  The apparatus to determine the charge to the mass ratio of electron
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 4 :
 32
chemistry
2.1.4 Discovery of Protons and Neutrons
Electrical discharge carried out in the modified 
cathode ray tube led to the discovery of canal 
rays carrying positively charged particles. The 
characteristics of these positively charged 
particles are listed below.
(i)	
Unlike cathode rays, mass of positively 
charged particles depends upon the 
nature of gas present in the cathode 
ray tube. These are simply the positively 
charged gaseous ions. 
(ii)	
The charge to mass ratio of the particles 
depends on the gas from which these 
originate.
(iii)	 Some of the positively charged particles 
carry a multiple of the fundamental unit 
of electrical charge.
(iv)	
The behaviour of these particles in the 
magnetic or electrical field is opposite 
to that observed for electron or cathode 
rays.
The smallest and lightest positive ion 
was obtained from hydrogen and was called 
proton. This positively charged particle was  
characterised in 1919. Later, a need was felt 
for the presence of electrically neutral particle 
as one of the constituent of atom. These 
particles were discovered by Chadwick (1932) 
by bombarding a thin sheet of beryllium 
by α-particles. When electrically neutral 
particles having a mass slightly greater than 
that of protons were emitted. He named 
these particles as neutrons. The important 
properties of all these fundamental particles 
are given in Table 2.1.
2.2	
Atomic Models
Observations obtained from the experiments 
mentioned in the previous sections have 
suggested that Dalton’s indivisible atom is 
composed of sub-atomic particles carrying 
positive and negative charges. The major 
problems before the scientists after the 
discovery of sub-atomic particles were:
• 
to account for the stability of atom,
• 
to compare the behaviour of elements 
in terms of both physical and chemical 
properties,
Millikan’s Oil Drop Method
In this method, oil droplets in the form of 
mist, produced by the atomiser, were allowed 
to enter through a tiny hole in the upper 
plate of electrical condenser. The downward 
motion of these droplets was viewed through 
the telescope, equipped with a micrometer 
eye piece. By measuring the rate of fall of 
these droplets, Millikan was able to measure 
the mass of oil droplets. The air inside the 
chamber was ionized by passing a beam of  
X-rays through it. The electrical charge on 
these oil droplets was acquired by collisions 
with gaseous ions. The fall of these charged 
oil droplets can be retarded, accelerated or 
made stationary depending upon the charge 
on the droplets and the polarity and strength 
of the voltage applied to the plate. By 
carefully measuring the effects of electrical 
field strength on the motion of oil droplets, 
Millikan concluded that the magnitude of 
electrical charge, q, on the droplets is always 
an integral multiple of the electrical charge, 
e, that is, q = n e, where n = 1, 2, 3... .
• 
to explain the formation of different 
kinds of molecules by the combination of 
different atoms and, 
• 
to understand the origin and nature of 
the characteristics of electromagnetic 
radiation absorbed or emitted by atoms.
Fig. 2.3	
The Millikan oil drop apparatus for 
measuring charge ‘e’. In chamber, 
the forces acting on oil drop are: 
gravitational, electrostatic due to 
electrical field and a viscous drag 
force when the oil drop is moving.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 5 :
 33
structure of atom
Different atomic models were proposed 
to explain the distributions of these charged 
particles in an atom. Although some of these 
models were not able to explain the stability 
of atoms, two of these models, one proposed 
by J.J. Thomson and the other proposed by 
Ernest Rutherford are discussed below.
2.2.1 Thomson Model of Atom
J. J. Thomson, in 1898, proposed that an 
atom possesses a spherical shape (radius 
approximately 10–10 m) in which the positive 
charge is uniformly distributed. The electrons 
are embedded into it in such a manner as to 
give the most stable electrostatic arrangement 
(Fig. 2.4). Many different names are given 
to this model, for example, plum pudding, 
raisin pudding or watermelon. This model 
In the later half of the nineteenth century 
different kinds of rays were discovered, 
besides those mentioned earlier. Wilhalm 
Röentgen (1845-1923) in 1895 showed 
that when electrons strike a material in 
the cathode ray tubes, produce rays which 
can cause fluorescence in the fluorescent 
materials placed outside the cathode ray 
tubes. Since Röentgen did not know the 
nature of the radiation, he named them 
X-rays and the name is still carried on. It was 
noticed that X-rays are produced effectively 
when electrons strike the dense metal anode, 
called targets. These are not deflected by the 
electric and magnetic fields and have a very 
high penetrating power through the matter 
and that is the reason that these rays are 
used to study the interior of the objects. 
These rays are of very short wavelengths 
(∼0.1 nm) and possess electro-magnetic 
character (Section 2.3.1).
Henri Becqueral (1852-1908) observed 
that there are certain elements which emit 
radiation on their own and named this 
phenomenon as  radioactivity and the 
elements known as radioactive elements. 
This field was developed by Marie Curie, 
Piere Curie, Rutherford and Fredrick Soddy. 
It was observed that three kinds of rays i.e., 
α, β- and γ-rays are emitted. Rutherford 
found that α-rays consists of high energy 
particles carrying two units of positive charge 
and four unit of atomic mass. He concluded 
that α- particles are helium nuclei as when α- 
particles combined with two electrons yielded 
helium gas. β-rays are negatively charged
Fig.2.4 Thomson model of atom
can be visualised as a pudding or watermelon 
of positive charge with plums or seeds 
(electrons) embedded into it. An important 
feature of this model is that the mass of the 
atom is assumed to be uniformly distributed 
over the atom. Although this model was able 
to explain the overall neutrality of the atom, 
but was not consistent with the results of later 
experiments. Thomson was awarded Nobel 
Prize for physics in 1906, for his theoretical 
and experimental investigations on the 
conduction of electricity by gases.
Table 2.1  Properties of Fundamental Particles 
Name
Symbol
Absolute 
charge/C
Relative 
charge
Mass/kg
Mass/u
Approx. 
mass/u
Electron
Proton
Neutron
e
p
n
– 1.602176×10–19
+ 1.602176×10–19
0
–1
+1
0
9.109382×10–31
1.6726216×10–27
1.674927×10–27
0.00054
1.00727
1.00867
0
1
1
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 6 :
 34
chemistry
represented in Fig. 2.5. A stream of high 
energy α–particles from a radioactive source 
was directed at a thin foil (thickness ∼ 100 nm) 
of gold metal. The thin gold foil had a circular 
fluorescent zinc sulphide screen around it. 
Whenever α–particles struck the screen, a 
tiny flash of light was produced at that point.
The results of scattering experiment were 
quite unexpected. According to Thomson 
model of atom, the mass of each gold atom 
in the foil should have been spread evenly 
over the entire atom, and α–particles had 
enough energy to pass directly through such a 
uniform distribution of mass. It was expected 
that the particles would slow down and 
change directions only by a small angles as 
they passed through the foil. It was observed 
that:
(i)	
most of the α–particles passed through 
the gold foil undeflected.
(ii)	
a small fraction of the α–particles was 
deflected by small angles.
(iii)	 a very few α–particles (∼1 in 20,000) 
bounced back, that is, were deflected by 
nearly 180°. 
On the basis of the observations, 
Rutherford drew the following conclusions 
regarding the structure of atom:
(i)	
Most of the space in the atom is empty as 
most of the α–particles passed through 
the foil undeflected.
(ii)	
A few positively charged α–particles were 
deflected. The deflection must be due 
to enormous repulsive force showing 
that the positive charge of the atom 
is not spread throughout the atom as 
Thomson had presumed. The positive 
charge has to be concentrated in a very 
small volume that repelled and deflected 
the positively charged α–particles. 
(iii)	 Calculations by Rutherford showed that 
the volume occupied by the nucleus 
is negligibly small as compared to the 
total volume of the atom. The radius of 
the atom is about 10–10 m, while that of 
nucleus is 10–15 m. One can appreciate 
this difference in size by realising that if 
Fig. 2.5	
Schematic view of Rutherford’s 
scattering experiment. When a beam 
of alpha () particles is “shot” at a thin 
gold foil, most of them pass through 
without much effect. Some, however, 
are deflected.
A. Rutherford’s scattering experiment
B. Schematic molecular view of the gold foil
2.2.2	 Rutherford’s Nuclear Model of Atom
Rutherford and his students (Hans Geiger 
and Ernest Marsden) bombarded very thin 
gold foil with α–particles. Rutherford’s famous  
–particle scattering experiment is 
particles similar to electrons. The γ-rays 
are high energy radiations like X-rays, are 
neutral in nature and do not consist of 
particles. As regards penetrating power, 
α-particles are the least, followed by β-rays 
(100 times that of α–particles) and γ-rays 
(1000 times of that α-particles).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 7 :
 35
structure of atom
a cricket ball represents a nucleus, then 
the radius of atom would be about 5 km.
On the basis of above observations and 
conclusions, Rutherford proposed the nuclear 
model of atom. According to this model:
(i)	
The positive charge and most of the mass 
of the atom was densely concentrated in 
extremely small region. This very small 
portion of the atom was called nucleus 
by Rutherford. 
(ii) 	 The nucleus is surrounded by electrons 
that move around the nucleus with a 
very high speed in circular paths called 
orbits. Thus, Rutherford’s model of atom 
resembles the solar system in which the 
nucleus plays the role of sun and the 
electrons that of revolving planets.
(iii) 	 Electrons and the nucleus are held 
together by electrostatic forces of 
attraction.
2.2.3	 Atomic Number and Mass Number
The presence of positive charge on the nucleus 
is due to the protons in the nucleus. As 
established earlier, the charge on the proton 
is equal but opposite to that of electron. The 
number of protons present in the nucleus is 
equal to atomic number (Z ). For example, the 
number of protons in the hydrogen nucleus 
is 1, in sodium atom it is 11, therefore their 
atomic numbers are 1 and 11 respectively. 
In order to keep the electrical neutrality, 
the number of electrons in an atom is equal 
to the number of protons (atomic number, 
Z ). For example, number of electrons in 
hydrogen atom and sodium atom are 1 and 
11 respectively.
Atomic number (Z) = number of protons in             
the nucleus of an atom
	
	
	
   =  number of electrons
	
	
	
       in a nuetral atom   (2.3)
While the positive charge of the nucleus 
is due to protons, the mass of the nucleus, 
due to protons and neutrons. As discussed 
earlier protons and neutrons present in the 
nucleus are collectively known as nucleons. 
The total number of nucleons is termed as 
mass number (A) of the atom. 
mass number (A) = number of protons (Z )
                         + number of
	
	
	
        neutrons (n)           (2.4)
2.2.4 Isobars and Isotopes
The composition of any atom can be 
represented by using the normal element 
symbol (X) with super-script on the left hand 
side as the atomic mass number (A) and 
subscript (Z) on the left hand side as the 
atomic number (i.e., A
Z X).
Isobars are the atoms with same mass 
number but different atomic number for 
example, 6
14C and 7
14N. On the other hand, 
atoms with identical atomic number but 
different atomic mass number are known 
as Isotopes. In other words (according to 
equation 2.4), it is evident that difference 
between the isotopes is due to the presence 
of different number of neutrons present in 
the nucleus. For example, considering of 
hydrogen atom again, 99.985% of hydrogen 
atoms contain only one proton. This isotope is 
called protium (1
1H). Rest of the percentage of 
hydrogen atom contains two other isotopes, 
the one containing 1 proton and 1 neutron 
is called deuterium (1
2D, 0.015%) and the 
other one possessing 1 proton and 2 neutrons 
is called tritium (1
3T ). The latter isotope is 
found in trace amounts on the earth. Other 
examples of commonly occuring isotopes are: 
carbon atoms containing 6, 7 and 8 neutrons 
besides 6 protons ( 6
12
6
13
6
14
C,
C,
C ); chlorine 
atoms containing 18 and 20 neutrons besides 
17 protons ( 17
35
17
37
Cl,
Cl ).
Lastly an important point to mention 
regarding isotopes is that chemical properties 
of atoms are controlled by the number of 
electrons, which are determined by the number 
of protons in the nucleus. Number of neutrons 
present in the nucleus have very little effect 
on the chemical properties of an element. 
Therefore, all the isotopes of a given element 
show same chemical behaviour.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 8 :
 36
chemistry
Problem 2.1 
Calculate the number of protons, 
neutrons and electrons in 80
35Br .
Solution
In this case, 80
35Br , Z = 35, A = 80, species 
is neutral
Number of protons = number of electrons 
= Z = 35
Number of neutrons = 80 – 35 = 45, 
(equation 2.4)
Problem 2.2 
The number of electrons, protons and 
neutrons in a species are equal to 18, 16 
and 16 respectively. Assign the proper 
symbol to the species.
Solution
The atomic number is equal to  
number of protons = 16. The element is 
sulphur (S).
Atomic mass number = number of 
protons + number of neutrons
= 16 + 16 = 32
Species is not neutral as the number of 
protons is not equal to electrons. It is 
anion (negatively charged) with charge 
equal to excess electrons = 18 – 16 = 2. 
Symbol is 
.
Note : Before using the notation 
A
Z X, 
find out whether the species is a neutral 
atom, a cation or an anion. If it is a 
neutral atom, equation (2.3) is valid, i.e., 
number of protons = number of electrons 
= atomic number. If the species is an 
ion, determine whether the number of 
protons are larger (cation, positive ion) 
or smaller (anion, negative ion) than the 
number of electrons. Number of neutrons 
is always given by A–Z, whether the 
species is neutral or ion.
2.2.5 Drawbacks of Rutherford Model
As you have learnt above, Rutherford nuclear 
model of an atom is like a small scale solar 
system with the nucleus playing the role 
*	 Classical mechanics is a theoretical science based on Newton’s laws of motion. It specifies the laws of motion of macroscopic 
objects.
of the massive sun and the electrons being 
similar to the lighter planets. When classical 
mechanics* is applied to the solar system, it 
shows that the planets describe well-defined 
orbits around the sun. The gravitational force 
between the planets is given by the expression 
G.
1
2
2
m m
r



 
where m1 and m2 are the masses, 
r is the distance of separation of the masses 
and G is the gravitational constant. The theory 
can also calculate precisely the planetary 
orbits and these are in agreement with the 
experimental measurements.
The similarity between the solar system 
and nuclear model suggests that electrons 
should move around the nucleus in well 
defined orbits. Further, the coulomb force 
(kq1q2/r2 where q1 and q2 are the charges, r 
is the distance of separation of the charges 
and k is the proportionality constant) between 
electron and the nucleus is mathematically 
similar to the gravitational force. However, 
when a body is moving in an orbit, it 
undergoes acceleration even if it is moving 
with a constant speed in an orbit because 
of changing direction. So an electron in the 
nuclear model describing planet like orbits 
is under acceleration. According to the 
electromagnetic theory of Maxwell, charged 
particles when accelerated should emit 
electromagnetic radiation (This feature does 
not exist for planets since they are uncharged). 
Therefore, an electron in an orbit will emit 
radiation, the energy carried by radiation 
comes from electronic motion. The orbit will 
thus continue to shrink. Calculations show 
that it should take an electron only 10–8 s 
to spiral into the nucleus. But this does 
not happen. Thus, the Rutherford model  
cannot explain the stability of an atom.  
If the motion of an electron is described on 
the basis of the classical mechanics and 
electromagnetic theory, you may ask that  
since the motion of electrons in orbits is  
leading to the instability of the atom, then  
why not consider electrons as stationary 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 9 :
 37
structure of atom
around the nucleus. If the electrons were  
stationary, electrostatic attraction between  
the dense nucleus and the electrons would 
pull the electrons toward the nucleus to 
form a miniature version of Thomson’s model 
of atom.
Another serious drawback of the 
Rutherford model is that it says nothing 
about  distribution of the electrons around the 
nucleus and the energies of these electrons.
2.3	
Developments Leading to the 
Bohr’s Model of Atom
Historically, results observed from the studies 
of interactions of radiations with matter have 
provided immense information regarding 
the structure of atoms and molecules. Neils 
Bohr utilised these results to improve upon 
the model proposed by Rutherford. Two 
developments played a major role in the 
formulation of Bohr’s model of atom. These 
were:
(i) 
Dual character of the electromagnetic 
radiation which means that radiations 
possess both wave like and particle like 
properties, and
(ii)	
Experimental results regarding atomic 
spectra.
First, we will discuss about the duel nature 
of electromagnetic radiations. Experimental 
results regarding atomic spectra will be 
discussed in Section 2.4.
2.3.1	 Wave Nature of Electromagnetic 
	
Radiation
In the mid-nineteenth century, physicists 
actively studied absorption and emission of 
radiation by heated objects. These are called 
thermal radiations. They tried to find out of 
what the thermal radiation is made. It is now 
a well-known fact that thermal radiations 
consist of electromagnetic waves of various 
frequencies or wavelengths. It is based on 
a number of modern concepts, which were 
unknown in the mid-nineteenth century. 
First active study of thermal radiation laws 
occured in the 1850’s and the theory of 
electromagnetic waves and the emission of 
such waves by accelerating charged particles 
was developed in the early 1870’s by James 
Clerk Maxwell, which was experimentally 
confirmed later by Heinrich Hertz. Here, we 
will learn some facts about electromagnetic 
radiations.
James Maxwell (1870) was the first to 
give a comprehensive explanation about the 
interaction between the charged bodies and 
the behaviour of electrical and magnetic 
fields on macroscopic level. He suggested 
that when electrically charged particle moves 
under accelaration, alternating electrical and 
magnetic fields are produced and transmitted. 
These fields are transmitted in the forms 
of waves called electromagnetic waves or 
electromagnetic radiation.
Light is the form of radiation known from 
early days and speculation about its nature 
dates back to remote ancient times. In earlier 
days (Newton) light was supposed to be made 
of particles (corpuscules). It was only in the 
19th century when wave nature of light was 
established.
Maxwell was again the first to reveal that 
light waves are associated with oscillating 
electric and magnetic character (Fig. 2.6). 
Although electromagnetic wave motion is 
complex in nature, we will consider here only 
a few simple properties.
(i) 	
The oscillating electric and magnetic 
fields produced by oscillating charged 
Fig.2.6 	
The electric and magnetic field 
components of an electromagnetic 
wave. These components have the 
same wavelength, frequency, speed 
and amplitude, but  they vibrate in two 
mutually perpendicular planes.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 10 :
 38
chemistry
particles are perpendicular to each 
other and both are perpendicular to the 
direction of propagation of the wave. 
Simplified picture of electromagnetic 
wave is shown in Fig. 2.6.
(ii) 	 Unlike sound waves or waves produced  
in water, electromagnetic waves do 
not require medium and can move in 
vacuum. 
(iii) 	 It is now well established that there 
are many types of electromagnetic 
radiations, which differ from one 
another in wavelength (or frequency). 
These constitute what is called 
electromagnetic spectrum (Fig. 2.7). 
Different regions of the spectrum are 
identified by different names. Some 
examples are: radio frequency region 
around 106 Hz, used for broadcasting; 
microwave region around 1010 Hz used 
for radar; infrared region around 1013 
Hz used for heating; ultraviolet region 
around 1016Hz a component of sun’s 
radiation. The small portion around 1015 
Hz, is what is ordinarily called visible 
light. It is only this part which our eyes 
can see (or detect). Special instruments 
are required to detect non-visible 
radiation.
(iv)  Different kinds of units are used to 
represent electromagnetic radiation.
These radiations are characterised by 
the properties, namely, frequency (ν) and 
wavelength (λ).
The SI unit for frequency (ν) is hertz  
(Hz, s–1), after Heinrich Hertz. It is defined as 
the number of waves that pass a given point 
in one second.
Wavelength should have the units of 
length and as you know that the SI units of 
length is meter (m). Since electromagnetic 
radiation consists of different kinds of waves 
of much smaller wavelengths, smaller units 
are used. Fig. 2.7 shows various types of 
electro-magnetic radiations which differ from 
one another in wavelengths and frequencies.
In vaccum all types of electromagnetic 
radiations, regardless of wavelength, travel at 
the same speed, i.e., 3.0 × 108 m s–1 (2.997925 
× 108 ms–1, to be precise). This is called speed 
of light and is given the symbol ‘c’. The 
frequency (ν ), wavelength (λ) and velocity of 
light (c) are related by the equation (2.5).
	
c = ν  λ		
	
	
        (2.5)
Fig. 2.7	
(a) The spectrum of electromagnetic radiation. (b) Visible spectrum. The visible region is only 
a small part of the entire spectrum.
(a)
(b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 11 :
 39
structure of atom
The other commonly used quantity 
specially in spectroscopy, is the wavenumber 
( ). It is defined as the number of wavelengths 
per unit length. Its units are reciprocal of 
wavelength unit, i.e., m–1. However commonly 
used unit is cm–1
 (not SI unit).
Problem 2.3
The Vividh Bharati station of All India 
Radio, Delhi, broadcasts on a frequency 
of 1,368 kHz (kilo hertz). Calculate 
the wavelength of the electromagnetic 
radiation emitted by transmitter. Which 
part of the electromagnetic spectrum 
does it belong to?
Solution
The wavelength, λ, is equal to c/ν, where 
c is the speed of electromagnetic radiation 
in vacuum and ν is the frequency. 
Substituting the given values, we have
c
v  
This is a characteristic radiowave 
wavelength.
Problem 2.4
The wavelength range of the visible 
spectrum extends from violet (400 nm) to 
red (750 nm). Express these wavelengths 
in frequencies (Hz). (1nm = 10–9 m)
Solution
Using equation 2.5, frequency of violet 
light
 
= 7.50 × 1014 Hz
*	 Diffraction is the bending of wave around an obstacle. 
**	 Interference is the combination of two waves of the same or different frequencies to give a wave whose distribution at each 
point in space is the algebraic or vector sum of disturbances at that  point resulting from each interfering wave. 
Frequency of red light
ν = 
= 4.00 × 1014 Hz
The range of visible spectrum is from  
4.0 × 1014 to 7.5 × 1014 Hz in terms of 
frequency units.
Problem 2.5
Calculate (a) wavenumber and (b) 
frequency of yellow radiation having 
wavelength 5800 Å. 
Solution
(a) Calculation of wavenumber ( )
λ=5800Å	= 5800 × 10–8 cm
	
= 5800 × 10–10 m
(b) 	 Calculation of the frequency (ν )
2.3.2	 Particle Nature of Electromagnetic  
	
Radiation: 
Planck’s 
Quantum  
	
Theory
Some of the experimental phenomenon 
such as diffraction* and interference** can 
be explained by the wave nature of the 
electromagnetic radiation. However, following 
are some of the observations which could 
not be explained with the help of even the 
electromagentic theory of 19th century 
physics (known as classical physics): 
(i)	
the nature of emission of radiation from 
hot bodies (black-body radiation)
(ii)	
ejection of electrons from metal surface 
when radiation strikes it (photoelectric 
effect)
(iii)	 variation of heat capacity of solids as a 
function of temperature
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 12 :
 40
chemistry
entering the hole will be reflected by the cavity 
walls and will be eventually absorbed by the 
walls. A black body is also a perfect radiator of 
radiant energy. Furthermore, a black body is 
in thermal equilibrium with its surroundings. 
It radiates same amount of energy per unit 
area as it absorbs from its surrounding in 
any given time. The amount of light emitted 
(intensity of radiation) from a black body 
and its spectral distribution depends only 
on its temperature. At a given temperature, 
intensity of radiation emitted increases 
with the increase of wavelength, reaches a 
maximum value at a given wavelength and 
then starts decreasing with further increase of 
wavelength, as shown in Fig. 2.8. Also, as the 
temperature increases, maxima of the curve 
shifts to short wavelength. Several attempts 
were made to predict the intensity of radiation 
as a function of wavelength.
But the results of the above experiment 
could not be explained satisfactorily on 
the basis of the wave theory of light. Max 
Planck arrived at a satisfactory relationship 
 Fig. 2.8(a)  Black body
 Fig. 2.8  Wavelength-intensity relationship
(iv)	Line spectra of atoms with special 
reference to hydrogen.
These phenomena indicate that the system 
can take energy only in discrete amounts. 
All possible energies cannot be taken up or 
radiated. 
It is noteworthy that the first concrete 
explanation for the phenomenon of the black 
body radiation mentioned above was given 
by Max Planck in 1900. Let us first try to 
understand this phenomenon, which is  given 
below:
Hot objects emit electromagnetic 
radiations over a wide range of wavelengths. 
At high temperatures, an appreciable 
proportion of radiation is in the visible 
region of the spectrum. As the temperature 
is raised, a higher proportion of short 
wavelength (blue light) is generated. For 
example, when an iron rod is heated in a 
furnace, it first turns to dull red and then 
progressively becomes more and more red 
as the temperature increases. As this is 
heated further, the radiation emitted becomes  
white and then becomes blue as the 
temperature becomes very high. This means 
that red radiation is most intense at a 
particular temperature and the blue radiation 
is more intense at another temperature. This 
means intensities of radiations of different 
wavelengths emitted by hot body depend 
upon its temperature. By late 1850’s it was 
known that objects made of different material 
and kept at different temperatures emit 
different amount of radiation. Also, when the 
surface of an object is irradiated with light 
(electromagnetic radiation), a part of radiant 
energy is generally reflected as such, a part 
is absorbed and a part of it is transmitted. 
The reason for incomplete absorption is 
that ordinary objects are as a rule imperfect 
absorbers of radiation. An ideal body, which 
emits and absorbs radiations of all frequencies 
uniformly, is called a black body and the 
radiation emitted by such a body is called 
black body radiation. In practice, no such 
body exists. Carbon black approximates 
fairly closely to black body. A good physical  
approximation to a black body is a cavity with a 
tiny hole, which has no other opening. Any ray 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 13 :
 41
structure of atom
by making an assumption that absorption 
and emmission of radiation arises from 
oscillator i.e., atoms in the wall of black 
body. Their frequency of oscillation is 
changed by interaction with oscilators of 
electromagnetic radiation. Planck assumed 
that radiation could be sub-divided into 
discrete chunks of energy. He suggested that 
atoms and molecules could emit or absorb 
energy only in discrete quantities and not 
in a continuous manner. He gave the name 
quantum to the smallest quantity of energy 
that can be emitted or absorbed in the form 
of electromagnetic radiation. The energy (E) 
of a quantum of radiation is proportional  
to its frequency (ν) and is expressed by 
equation (2.6). 
     E = hυ                                              (2.6)
The proportionality constant, ‘h’ is known 
as Planck’s constant and has the value 
6.626×10–34 J s. 
With this theory, Planck was able to explain 
the distribution of intensity in the radiation 
from black body as a function of frequency or 
wavelength at different temperatures. 
Quantisation has been compared to 
standing on a staircase. A person can stand 
on any step of a staircase, but it is not possible 
for him/her to stand in between the two steps. 
The energy can take any one of the values 
from the following set, but cannot take on any 
values between them.
E = 0, hυ, 2hυ , 3hυ....nhυ..... 
Photoelectric Effect
In 1887, H. Hertz performed a very interesting 
experiment in which electrons (or electric 
current) were ejected when certain metals 
(for example potassium, rubidium, caesium 
etc.) were exposed to a beam of light as shown  
in Fig. 2.9. The phenomenon is called 
Photoelectric effect. The results observed 
in this experiment were: 
(i)	
The electrons are ejected from the metal 
surface as soon as the beam of light 
strikes the surface, i.e., there is no time 
lag between the striking of light beam and 
the ejection of electrons from the metal 
surface.
(ii)	
The number of electrons ejected is 
proportional to the intensity or brightness 
of light. 
(iii)	 For each metal, there is a characteristic 
minimum frequency, ν0 (also known 
as threshold frequency) below which 
photoelectric effect is not observed. At 
a frequency ν >ν0, the ejected electrons 
come out with certain kinetic energy. 
The kinetic energies of these electrons 
increase with the increase of frequency 
of the light used.
All the above results could not be explained 
on the basis of laws of classical physics. 
According to latter, the energy content of the 
beam of light depends upon the brightness of 
the light. In other words, number of electrons 
ejected and kinetic energy associated with 
them should depend on the brightness of light. 
It has been observed that though the number 
Fig.2.9 	
Equipment for studying the photoelectric 
effect. Light of a particular frequency 
strikes a clean metal surface inside a 
vacuum chamber. Electrons are ejected 
from the metal and are counted by a 
detector that measures their kinetic 
energy.
Max Planck
(1858–1947)
Max Planck, a German physicist, 
received his Ph.D in theoretical 
physics from the University of 
Munich in 1879. In 1888, he 
was appointed Director of the 
Institute of Theoretical Physics 
at the University of Berlin. 
Planck was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics 
in 1918 for his quantum theory. Planck also made 
significant contributions in thermodynamics and 
other areas of physics.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 14 :
 42
chemistry
of electrons ejected does depend upon the 
brightness of light, the kinetic energy of the 
ejected electrons does not. For example, red 
light [ν = (4.3 to 4.6) × 1014 Hz] of any brightness 
(intensity) may shine on a piece of potassium 
metal for hours but no photoelectrons are 
ejected. But, as soon as even a very weak 
yellow light (ν = 5.1–5.2 × 1014 Hz) shines on 
the potassium metal, the photoelectric effect 
is observed. The threshold frequency (ν0) for 
potassium metal is 5.0×1014 Hz. 
Einstein (1905) was able to explain the 
photoelectric effect using Planck’s quantum 
theory of electromagnetic radiation as a 
starting point. 
the minimum energy required to eject the 
electron is hν0 (also called work function, 
W0; Table 2.2), then the difference in energy  
(hν – hν0 ) is transferred as the kinetic energy of 
the photoelectron. Following the conservation 
of energy principle, the kinetic energy of the 
ejected electron is given by the equation 2.7. 
	
(2.7)
where me is the mass of the electron and v is the 
velocity associated with the ejected electron. 
Lastly, a more intense beam of light consists 
of larger number of photons, consequently the 
number of electrons ejected is also larger as 
compared to that in an experiment in which a 
beam of weaker intensity of light is employed. 
Dual 
Behaviour 
of 
Electromagnetic 
Radiation
The particle nature of light posed a dilemma for 
scientists. On the one hand, it could explain 
the black body radiation and  photoelectric 
effect satisfactorily but on the other hand, 
it was not consistent with the known wave 
behaviour of light which could account for the 
phenomena of interference and diffraction. 
The only way to resolve the dilemma was 
to accept the idea that light possesses 
both particle and wave-like properties, i.e., 
light has dual behaviour. Depending on 
the experiment, we find that light behaves 
either as a wave or as a stream of particles. 
Whenever radiation interacts with matter, it 
displays particle like properties in contrast 
to the wavelike properties (interference 
and diffraction), which it exhibits when it 
propagates. This concept was totally alien to 
the way the scientists thought about matter 
and radiation and it took them a long time to 
become convinced of its validity. It turns out, 
as you shall see later, that some microscopic 
particles like electrons also exhibit this wave-
particle duality.
Shining a beam of light on to a metal 
surface can, therefore, be viewed as shooting 
a beam of particles, the photons. When a 
photon of sufficient energy strikes an electron 
in the atom of the metal, it transfers its energy 
instantaneously to the electron during the 
collision and the electron is ejected without 
any time lag or delay. Greater the energy 
possessed by the photon, greater will be 
transfer of energy to the electron and greater 
the kinetic energy of the ejected electron. In 
other words, kinetic energy of the ejected 
electron is proportional to the frequency 
of the electromagnetic radiation. Since the 
striking photon has energy equal to hν  and 
Table 2.2  Values of Work Function (W0) for a Few Metals 
Metal
Li
Na
K
Mg
Cu
Ag
W0 /eV
2.42
2.3
2.25
3.7
4.8
4.3
Albert Einstein, a German born 
American physicist, is regarded 
by many as one of the two great 
physicists the world has known 
(the other is Isaac Newton). His 
three research papers (on special 
relativity, Brownian motion and 
the photoelectric effect) which 
he published in 1905, while he 
was employed as a technical 
assistant in a Swiss patent office in Berne have 
profoundly influenced the development of physics. 
He received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921 for 
his explanation of the photoelectric effect.
Albert Einstein
(1879–1955)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 15 :
 43
structure of atom
Problem 2.6
Calculate energy of one mole of photons 
of radiation whose frequency is 5 ×1014 
Hz.
Solution
Energy (E) of one photon is given by the 
expression 
E = hν
h = 6.626 ×10–34 J s
ν = 5×1014 s–1 (given)
E = (6.626 ×10–34 J s) × (5 ×1014 s–1)
= 3.313 ×10–19 J
Energy of one mole of photons
= (3.313 ×10–19 J) × (6.022 × 1023 mol–1)
= 199.51 kJ mol–1
Problem 2.7
A 100 watt bulb emits monochromatic 
light of wavelength 400 nm. Calculate the 
number of photons emitted per second 
by the bulb.
Solution
Power of the bulb = 100 watt 
                            = 100 J s–1
Energy of one photon E = hν = hc/λ  
= 6.626
10
 J s
3
10  m s
34
8
1







400
10 9m
= 4.969 × 10–19 J
Number of photons emitted
 
100
4 969
10
2 012
10
1
19
20
1
  
J s
J
s






.
.
Problem 2.8
When electromagnetic radiation of 
wavelength 300 nm falls on the surface 
of sodium, electrons are emitted with a 
kinetic energy of 1.68 ×105 J mol–1. What 
is the minimum energy needed to remove 
an electron from sodium? What is the 
maximum wavelength that will cause a 
photoelectron to be emitted?
Solution
The energy (E) of a 300 nm photon is 
given by 
     = 6.626 × 10–19 J 
The energy of one mole of photons 
= 6.626 ×10–19 J × 6.022 × 1023 mol–1
= 3.99 × 105 J mol–1
The minimum energy needed to remove 
one mole of electrons from sodium 
= (3.99 –1.68) 105 J mol–1  
= 2.31 × 105 J mol–1
The minimum energy for one electron
This corresponds to the wavelength 
=
c
= 6.626
10
J s
3.0
10 m s
3.84
10
J
34
8
1
19
h
E
     = 517 nm 
(This corresponds to green light)
Problem 2.9
The threshold frequency ν0 for a metal is 
7.0 ×1014 s–1. Calculate the kinetic energy 
of an electron emitted when radiation of 
frequency ν =1.0 ×1015 s–1 hits the metal.
Solution 
According to Einstein’s equation
Kinetic energy = ½ mev2=h(ν – ν0 )
= (6.626 × 10–34 J s) (1.0 × 1015 s–1 – 7.0          	
	
	
	
	
      ×1014 s–1)
= (6.626 × 10–34 J s) (10.0 × 1014 s–1 – 7.0 	
	
	
	
	
      ×1014 s–1)
= (6.626 × 10–34 J s) × (3.0 × 1014 s–1)
= 1.988 × 10–19 J 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 16 :
 44
chemistry
2.3.3	 Evidence 
for 
the 
quantized*  
	
Electronic Energy Levels: Atomic 
	
spectra
The speed of light depends upon the nature 
of the medium through which it passes. As a 
result, the beam of light is deviated or refracted 
from its original path as it passes from one 
medium to another. It is observed that when 
a ray of white light is passed through a prism, 
the wave with shorter wavelength bends more 
than the one with a longer wavelength. Since 
ordinary white light consists of waves with 
all the wavelengths in the visible range, a ray 
of white light is spread out into a series of 
coloured bands called spectrum. The light of 
red colour which has longest wavelength is 
deviated the least while the violet light, which 
has shortest wavelength is deviated the most. 
The spectrum of white light, that we can 
see, ranges from violet at 7.50 × 1014 Hz to 
red at 4×1014 Hz. Such a spectrum is called 
continuous spectrum. Continuous because 
violet merges into blue, blue into green and 
so on. A similar spectrum is produced when 
a rainbow forms in the sky. Remember that 
visible light is just a small portion of the 
electromagnetic radiation (Fig.2.7). When 
electromagnetic radiation interacts with 
matter, atoms and molecules may absorb 
energy and reach to a higher energy state. With 
higher energy, these are in an unstable state. 
For returning to their normal (more stable, 
lower energy states) energy state, the atoms 
and molecules emit radiations in various 
regions of the electromagnetic spectrum.
Emission and Absorption Spectra
The spectrum of radiation emitted by a 
substance that has absorbed energy is called 
an emission spectrum. Atoms, molecules or 
ions that have absorbed radiation are said 
to be “excited”. To produce an emission 
spectrum, energy is supplied to a sample by 
heating it or irradiating it and the wavelength 
(or frequency) of the radiation emitted, as 
the sample gives up the absorbed energy, is 
recorded.
An absorption spectrum is like the 
photographic negative of an emission 
spectrum. A continuum of radiation is passed 
through a sample which absorbs radiation of 
certain wavelengths. The missing wavelength 
which corresponds to the radiation absorbed 
by the matter, leave dark spaces in the bright 
continuous spectrum.
The study of emission or absorption 
spectra is referred to as spectroscopy. The 
spectrum of the visible light, as discussed 
above, was continuous as all wavelengths (red 
to violet) of the visible light are represented in 
the spectra. The emission spectra of atoms in 
the gas phase, on the other hand, do not show 
a continuous spread of wavelength from red 
to violet, rather they emit light only at specific 
wavelengths with dark spaces between them. 
Such spectra are called line spectra or 
atomic spectra because the emitted radiation 
is identified by the appearance of bright lines 
in the spectra (Fig. 2.10 page 45).
Line emission spectra are of great 
interest in the study of electronic structure. 
Each element has a unique line emission 
spectrum. The characteristic lines in atomic 
spectra can be used in chemical analysis to 
identify unknown atoms in the same way 
as fingerprints are used to identify people. 
The exact matching of lines of the emission 
spectrum of the atoms of a known element 
with the lines from an unknown sample 
quickly establishes the identity of the latter, 
German chemist, Robert Bunsen (1811-1899) 
was one of the first investigators to use line 
spectra to identify elements.
Elements like rubidium (Rb), caesium (Cs) 
thallium (Tl), indium (In), gallium (Ga) and 
scandium (Sc) were discovered when their 
minerals were analysed by spectroscopic 
methods. The element helium (He) was 
discovered in the sun by spectroscopic method.
Line Spectrum of Hydrogen 
When an electric discharge is passed through 
gaseous hydrogen, the H2 molecules dissociate 
and the energetically excited hydrogen atoms 
produced emit electromagnetic radiation of 
discrete frequencies. The hydrogen spectrum 
consists of several series of lines named after 
their discoverers. Balmer showed in 1885 
on the basis of experimental observations 
*	 The restriction of any property to discrete values is called quantization.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 17 :
 45
structure of atom
that if spectral lines are expressed in terms 
of wavenumber ( ), then the visible lines of 
the hydrogen spectrum obey the following 
formula:
         (2.8)
where n is an integer equal to or greater than 
3 (i.e., n = 3,4,5,....)
The series of lines described by this formula 
are called the Balmer series. The Balmer 
series of lines are the only lines in the hydrogen 
spectrum which appear in the visible region 
of the electromagnetic spectrum. The Swedish 
spectroscopist, Johannes Rydberg, noted 
that all series of lines in the hydrogen 
spectrum could be described by the following 
expression :
	
        (2.9)
where n1=1,2........
n2 = n1 + 1, n1 + 2......
The value 109,677 cm–1 is called the 
Rydberg constant for hydrogen. The first five 
series of lines that correspond to n1 = 1, 2, 3, 
4, 5 are known as Lyman, Balmer, Paschen, 
Bracket and Pfund series, respectively,  
Table 2.3 shows these series of transitions in 
the hydrogen spectrum. Fig. 2.11 (page, 46) 
shows the Lyman, Balmer and Paschen series 
of transitions for hydrogen atom.
Of all the elements, hydrogen atom has 
the simplest line spectrum. Line spectrum 
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2.10 (a) Atomic emission.	 The light emitted by a sample of excited hydrogen atoms (or any other 
element) can be passed through a prism and separated into certain discrete wavelengths. Thus an emission 
spectrum, which is a photographic recording of the separated wavelengths is called as line spectrum. Any 
sample of reasonable size contains an enormous number of atoms. Although a single atom can be in only 
one excited state at a time, the collection of atoms contains all possible excited states. The light emitted as 
these atoms fall to lower energy states is responsible for the spectrum. (b) Atomic absorption. When white 
light is passed through unexcited atomic hydrogen and then through a slit and prism, the transmitted light 
is lacking in intensity at the same wavelengths as are emitted in (a) The recorded absorption spectrum is 
also a line spectrum and the photographic negative of the emission spectrum.
Table 2.3	
The Spectral Lines for Atomic 
Hydrogen
Series
n1
n2
Spectral Region
Lyman
Balmer
Paschen
Brackett
Pfund
1
2
3
4
5
2,3....
3,4....
4,5....
5,6....
6,7....
Ultraviolet
Visible
Infrared
Infrared
Infrared
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 18 :
 46
chemistry
becomes more and more complex for heavier 
atom. There are, however, certain features 
which are common to all line spectra, i.e., 
(i) line spectrum of element is unique and 
(ii) there is regularity in the line spectrum of 
each element. The questions which arise are: 
What are the reasons for these similarities? 
Is it something to do with the electronic 
structure of atoms? These are the questions 
need to be answered. We shall find later that 
the answers to these questions provide the 
key in understanding electronic structure of 
these elements.
2.4	
Bohr’s Model for Hydrogen 
Atom
Neils Bohr (1913) was the first to explain 
quantitatively the general features of the 
structure of hydrogen atom and its spectrum. 
He used Planck’s concept of quantisation 
of energy. Though the theory is not the 
modern quantum mechanics, it can still 
be used to rationalize many points in the 
Fig. 2.11	 Transitions of the electron in the 
hydrogen atom (The diagram shows the 
Lyman, Balmer and Paschen series of 
transitions)
atomic structure and spectra. Bohr’s model 
for hydrogen atom is based on the following 
postulates:
i)	
The electron in the hydrogen atom can 
move around the nucleus in a circular 
path of fixed radius and energy. These 
paths are called orbits, stationary states 
or allowed energy states. These orbits 
are arranged concentrically around the 
nucleus.
ii)	
The energy of an electron in the orbit 
does not change with time. However, 
the electron will move from a lower 
stationary state to a higher stationary 
state when required amount of energy 
is absorbed by the electron or energy is 
emitted when electron moves from higher 
stationary state to lower stationary state 
(equation 2.16). The energy change does 
not take place in a continuous manner.
Angular Momentum
Just as linear momentum is the product 
of mass (m) and linear velocity (v), angular 
momentum is the product of moment of 
inertia (I) and angular velocity (ω). For an 
electron of mass me, moving in a circular 
path of radius r around the nucleus, 
	 	
angular momentum = I × ω
Since I = mer2, and  ω = v/r where v is the 
linear velocity, 
∴angular momentum =  mer2 × v/r = mevr
iii)	
The frequency of radiation absorbed or 
emitted when transition occurs between 
two stationary states that differ in 
energy by ∆E, is given by:
	
                       (2.10)
	
Where E1 and E2 are the energies of the 
lower and higher allowed energy states 
respectively. This expression is commonly 
known as Bohr’s frequency rule.
iv)	
The angular momentum of an electron 
is quantised. In a given stationary state 
it can be expressed as in equation (2.11)
	
  m
r
n h
e v .2
  n = 1,2,3.....        (2.11)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 19 :
 47
structure of atom
Where me is the mass of electron, v is the 
velocity and r is the radius of the orbit in 
which electron is moving.
Thus an electron can move only in those 
orbits for which its angular momentum is 
integral multiple of h/2π.  That means angular 
momentum is quantised. Radiation is emitted 
or obsorbed only when transition of electron 
takes place from one quantised value of 
angular momentum to another. Therefore, 
Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory does not 
apply here that is why only certain fixed orbits 
are allowed.
The details regarding the derivation of 
energies of the stationary states used by Bohr, 
are quite complicated and will be discussed in 
higher classes. However, according to Bohr’s 
theory for hydrogen atom:
a)	
The stationary states for electron are 
numbered n = 1,2,3.......... These integral 
numbers (Section 2.6.2) are known as 
Principal quantum numbers.
b)	
The radii of the stationary states are 
expressed as: 
	
rn  = n2 a0                                      (2.12)
	
where a0 = 52.9 pm. Thus the radius of 
the first stationary state, called the Bohr 
orbit, is 52.9 pm. Normally the electron 
in the hydrogen atom is found in this 
orbit (that is n=1). As n increases the 
value of r will increase. In other words 
the electron will be present away from 
the nucleus.
c)	
The most important property associated 
with the electron, is the energy of its 
stationary state. It is given by the 
expression.
E
n
n
H





R
1
2
	
    n = 1,2,3....          (2.13)
where RH is called Rydberg constant and 
its value is 2.18×10–18 J. The energy of the 
lowest state, also called as the ground state, is  
E1 = –2.18×10–18 ( 1
12 ) = –2.18×10–18 J. The 
energy of the stationary state for n = 2, will
be : E2 = –2.18×10–18J ( 1
22 ) = –0.545×10–18 J. 
Fig. 2.11 depicts the energies of different 
stationary states or energy levels of hydrogen 
atom. This representation is called an energy 
level diagram.
When the electron is free from the influence 
of nucleus, the energy is taken as zero. The 
electron in this situation is associated with the 
stationary state of Principal Quantum number 
= n = ∞ and is called as ionized hydrogen atom. 
When the electron is attracted by the nucleus 
and is present in orbit n, the energy is emitted 
and its energy is lowered. That is the reason 
What does the negative electronic 
energy (En) for hydrogen atom mean?
The energy of the electron in a hydrogen 
atom has a negative sign for all possible 
orbits (eq. 2.13). What does this negative 
sign convey? This negative sign means 
that the energy of the electron in the 
atom is lower than the energy of a free 
electron at rest. A free electron at rest 
is an electron that is infinitely far away 
from the nucleus and is assigned the 
energy value of zero. Mathematically, this 
corresponds to setting n equal to infinity 
in the equation (2.13) so that E∞=0. As the 
electron gets closer to the nucleus (as n 
decreases), En becomes larger in absolute 
value and more and more negative. The 
most negative energy value is given by 
n=1 which corresponds to the most stable 
orbit. We call this the ground state.
Niels Bohr
(1885–1962)
Niels Bohr, a Danish physicist 
received his Ph.D. from the 
University of Copenhagen in 
1911. He then spent a year 
with J.J. Thomson and Ernest 
Rutherford in England. In 1913, 
he returned to Copenhagen where he remained for 
the rest of his life. In 1920 he was named Director 
of the Institute of theoretical Physics. After first 
World War, Bohr worked energetically for peaceful 
uses of atomic energy. He received the first Atoms 
for Peace award in 1957. Bohr was awarded the 
Nobel Prize in Physics in 1922.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 20 :
 48
chemistry
for the presence of negative sign in equation 
(2.13) and depicts its stability relative to the 
reference state of zero energy and n = ∞.
d)	
Bohr’s theory can also be applied to 
the ions containing only one electron, 
similar to that present in hydrogen 
atom. For example, He+ Li2+, Be3+ and so 
on. The energies of the stationary states 
associated with these kinds of ions (also 
known as hydrogen like species) are 
given by the expression.
	
E
Z
n
n
J







2 18
10 18
2
2
.
              (2.14)
	
and radii by the expression
	
r
pm
n = 52 9
2
. (
)
n
Z
                         (2.15)
where Z is the atomic number and has 
values 2,3 for the helium and lithium atoms 
respectively. From the above equations, it is 
evident that the value of energy becomes more 
negative and that of radius becomes smaller 
with increase of Z. This means that electron 
will be tightly bound to the nucleus.
e)	
It is also possible to calculate the 
velocities of electrons moving in these 
orbits. Although the precise equation 
is not given here, qualitatively the 
magnitude of velocity of electron 
increases with increase of positive 
charge on the nucleus and decreases 
with increase of principal quantum 
number.
2.4.1	 Explanation of Line Spectrum of  
	
Hydrogen
Line spectrum observed in case of hydrogen 
atom, as mentioned in section 2.3.3, can be 
explained quantitatively using Bohr’s model. 
According to assumption 2, radiation (energy) 
is absorbed if the electron moves from the 
orbit of smaller Principal quantum number to 
the orbit of higher Principal quantum number, 
whereas the radiation (energy) is emitted if 
the electron moves from higher orbit to lower 
orbit. The energy gap between the two orbits 
is given by equation (2.16)
∆E = Ef – Ei                                      (2.16)
Combining equations (2.13) and (2.16)
E
n
n









R
R
H
f
H
i
2
2
 
(where ni and nf 
stand for initial orbit and final orbits)	
∆E 












R
J
H
i
f
i
f
1
1
2 18
10
1
1
2
2
18
2
2
n
n
n
n
.
 
                                                
(2.17)
The frequency (ν) associated with the 
absorption and emission of the photon can 
be evaluated by using equation           (2.18)










2 18
10
6 626
10
1
1
18
34
2
2
.
.
J
Js
i
f
n
n
           (2.18)







3 29
10
1
1
15
2
2
.
n
n
i
f
Hz               (2.19)
and in terms of wavenumbers ( )
                     (2.20)
= 3 29
10
3
10
1
1
15
1
8
2
2
.









s
m s s
i
f
n
n
= 1 09677
10
1
1
7
2
2
1
.







n
n
i
f
m
       (2.21)
In case of absorption spectrum, nf > ni and 
the term in the parenthesis is positive and 
energy is absorbed. On the other hand in case 
of emission spectrum ni > nf , ∆ E is negative 
and energy is released.
The expression (2.17) is similar to that 
used by Rydberg (2.9) derived empirically 
using the experimental data available at that 
time. Further, each spectral line, whether 
in absorption or emission spectrum, can 
be associated to the particular transition in 
hydrogen atom. In case of large number of 
hydrogen atoms, different possible transitions 
can be observed and thus leading to large 
number of spectral lines. The brightness or 
intensity of spectral lines depends  upon the 
number of photons of same wavelength or 
frequency absorbed or emitted.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 21 :
 49
structure of atom
Problem 2.10 
What are the frequency and wavelength 
of a photon emitted during a transition 
from n = 5 state to the n = 2 state in the 
hydrogen atom?
Solution
Since ni = 5 and nf = 2, this transition 
gives rise to a spectral line in the visible 
region of the Balmer series. From 
equation (2.17)
E =
=
2 18
10
1
5
1
2
4 58
10
18
2
2
19
.
.










J
J
It is an emission energy
The frequency of the photon (taking  
energy in terms of magnitude)  is given by
 
   = 6.91×1014 Hz
Problem 2.11 
Calculate the energy associated with the 
first orbit of He+. What is the radius of 
this orbit?
Solution
E
Z
n
n
J



( .
)
2 18
10 18
2
2
 atom–1
For He+, n = 1, Z = 2
E1
18
2
2
18
2 18
10
2
1
8 72
10






( .
)(
)
.
J
J
The radius of the orbit is given by 
equation (2.15)
r
nm
n
n
Z
= ( .
)
0 0529
2
Since n = 1, and Z = 2
r
nm
nm
n =
=
( .
)
.
0 0529
1
2
0 02645
2
2.4.2	 Limitations of Bohr’s Model
Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom was no 
doubt an improvement over Rutherford’s 
nuclear model, as it could account for the 
stability and line spectra of hydrogen atom 
and hydrogen like ions (for example, He+, Li2+, 
Be3+, and so on). However, Bohr’s model was 
too simple to account for the following points.
i) 
It fails to account for the finer details 
(doublet, that is two closely spaced lines) 
of the hydrogen atom spectrum observed 
by using sophisticated spectroscopic 
techniques. This model is also unable 
to explain the spectrum of atoms 
other than hydrogen, for example, 
helium atom which possesses only two 
electrons. Further, Bohr’s theory was 
also unable to explain the splitting 
of spectral lines in the presence of 
magnetic field (Zeeman effect) or an 
electric field (Stark effect).
ii)	
It could not explain the ability of atoms 
to form molecules by chemical bonds.
In other words, taking into account the 
points mentioned above, one needs a better 
theory which can explain the salient features 
of the structure of complex atoms.
2.5	
Towards Quantum Mechanical 
Model of the Atom
In view of the shortcoming of the Bohr’s 
model, attempts were made to develop a more 
suitable and general model for atoms. Two 
important developments which contributed 
significantly in the formulation of such a 
model were:
1.  Dual behaviour of matter, 
2.  Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
2.5.1 Dual Behaviour of Matter
The French physicist, de Broglie, in 1924 
proposed that matter, like radiation, should 
also exhibit dual behaviour i.e., both particle 
and wavelike properties. This means that 
just as the photon has momentum as well 
as wavelength, electrons should also have 
momentum as well as wavelength, de Broglie, 
from this analogy, gave the following relation 
between wavelength (λ) and momentum (p) of 
a material particle.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 22 :
 50
chemistry
Solution
According to de Brogile equation (2.22)





h
mv
Js
kg
m s
( .
)
( .
)(
)
6 626
10
0 1
10
34
1
= 6.626 × 10–34 m (J = kg m2 s–2) 
Problem 2.13
The mass of an electron is 9.1×10–31 kg. 
If its K.E. is 3.0×10–25 J, calculate its 
wavelength.
Solution
Since K.E. = ½ mv2
v
K E
kg m s
kg
=
=
2
2
3 0
10
9 1
10
1 2
25
2
2
31
1 2
. .
.
.
/
/
m














= 812 m s–1
h
m v
Js
6 626
10
.
34
kg
m s
9 1
10
812
( .
)(
)
1
31
= 8967 × 10–10 m = 896.7 nm
Problem 2.14
Calculate the mass of a photon with 
wavelength 3.6 Å.
Solution
λ = 3.6 Å = 3.6  × 10–10 m
Velocity of photon = velocity of light
34
10
8
1
= 6.135 × 10–29 kg


h
m
h
p
v
                                     (2.22)
where m is the mass of the particle, v its 
velocity and p its momentum. de Broglie’s 
prediction was confirmed experimentally when 
it was found that an electron beam undergoes 
diffraction, a phenomenon characteristic of 
waves. This fact has been put to use in making 
an electron microscope, which is based on 
the wavelike behaviour of electrons just as an 
ordinary microscope utilises the wave nature 
of light. An electron microscope is a powerful 
tool in modern scientific research because it 
achieves a magnification of about 15 million 
times.
It needs to be noted that according to de 
Broglie, every object in motion has a wave 
character. The wavelengths associated with 
ordinary objects are so short (because of their 
large masses) that their wave properties cannot 
be detected. The wavelengths associated with 
electrons and other subatomic particles (with 
very small mass) can however be detected 
experimentally. Results obtained from 
the following problems prove these points 
qualitatively.
Problem 2.12
What will be the wavelength of a ball of 
mass 0.1 kg moving with a velocity of 
10 m s–1 ?
2.5.2	 Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle 
Werner Heisenberg a German physicist in 
1927, stated uncertainty principle which is 
the consequence of dual behaviour of matter 
and radiation. It states that it is impossible 
to determine simultaneously, the exact 
position and exact momentum (or velocity) 
of an electron.
Mathematically, it can be given as in 
equation (2.23).
Louis de Broglie 
(1892 – 1987) 
Louis de Broglie, a French 
physicist, studied history 
as an undergraduate in the 
early 1910’s. His interest 
turned to science as a result 
of his assignment to radio 
communications in World 
War I. He received his 
Dr. Sc. from the University of Paris in 1924. 
He was professor of theoretical physics at 
the University of Paris from 1932 untill his 
retirement in 1962. He was awarded the  
Nobel Prize in Physics in 1929.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 23 :
 51
structure of atom
                         
(2.23)
where ∆x is the uncertainty in position and 
∆px (or ∆vx) is the uncertainty in momentum 
(or velocity) of the particle. If the position of 
the electron is known with high degree of 
accuracy (∆x is small), then the velocity of the 
electron will be uncertain [∆(vx) is large]. On 
the other hand, if the velocity of the electron 
is known precisely (∆(vx ) is small), then the 
position of the electron will be uncertain  
(∆x will be large). Thus, if we carry out some 
physical measurements on the electron’s 
position or velocity, the outcome will always 
depict a fuzzy or blur picture.
The uncertainty principle can be best 
understood with the help of an example. 
Suppose you are asked to measure the 
thickness of a sheet of paper with an 
unmarked metrestick. Obviously, the results 
obtained would be extremely inaccurate 
and meaningless. In order to obtain any 
accuracy, you should use an instrument 
graduated in units smaller than the thickness 
of a sheet of the paper. Analogously, in order 
to determine the position of an electron, we 
must use a meterstick calibrated in units of 
smaller than the dimensions of electron (keep 
in mind that an electron is considered as a 
point charge and is therefore, dimensionless). 
To observe an electron, we can illuminate it 
with “light” or electromagnetic radiation. The 
“light” used must have a wavelength smaller 
than the dimensions of an electron. The high 
momentum photons of such light 
p h
= 



 
would change the energy of electrons by 
collisions. In this process we, no doubt, 
would be able to calculate the position of the 
electron, but we would know very little about 
the velocity of the electron after the collision.
Significance of Uncertainty Principle
One of the important implications of the 
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle is that it 
rules out existence of definite paths or 
trajectories of electrons and other similar 
particles. The trajectory of an object is 
determined by its location and velocity at 
various moments. If we know where a body 
is at a particular instant and if we also know 
its velocity and the forces acting on it at that 
instant, we can tell where the body would 
be sometime later. We, therefore, conclude 
that the position of an object and its velocity 
fix its trajectory. Since for a sub-atomic 
object such as an electron, it is not possible 
simultaneously to determine the position and 
velocity at any given instant to an arbitrary 
degree of precision, it is not possible to talk 
of the trajectory of an electron.
The effect of Heisenberg Uncertainty 
Principle is significant only for motion of 
microscopic objects and is negligible for 
that of macroscopic objects. This can be 
seen from the following examples.
If uncertainty principle is applied to an 
object of mass, say about a milligram (10–6 kg), 
then 
Werner Heisenberg (1901 – 1976) Werner Heisenberg (1901 – 1976) received his Ph.D. in 
physics from the University of Munich in 1923. He then spent a year working with Max 
Born at Gottingen and three years with Niels Bohr in Copenhagen. He was professor of 
physics at the University of Leipzig from 1927 to 1941. During World War II, Heisenberg 
was in charge of German research on the atomic bomb. After the war he was named 
director of Max Planck Institute for physics in Gottingen. He was also accomplished 
mountain climber. Heisenberg was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1932.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 24 :
 52
chemistry
The value of ∆v∆x obtained is extremely 
small and is insignificant. Therefore, one 
may say that in dealing with milligram-
sized or heavier objects, the associated 
uncertainties are hardly of any real 
consequence.
In the case of a microscopic object like an 
electron on the other hand. ∆v.∆x obtained is 
much larger and such uncertainties are of real 
consequence. For example, for an electron 
whose mass is 9.11×10–31 kg., according to 
Heisenberg uncertainty principle
It, therefore, means that if one tries to 
find the exact location of the electron, say 
to an uncertainty of only 10–8 m, then the 
uncertainty ∆v in velocity would be 
10
10
10
4
2
1
8
4
1





m s
m
ms
 
which is so large that the classical picture 
of electrons moving in Bohr’s orbits (fixed) 
cannot hold good. It, therefore, means that 
the precise statements of the position 
and momentum of electrons have to be 
replaced by the statements of probability, 
that the electron has at a given position 
and momentum. This is what happens in 
the quantum mechanical model of atom.
= 0.579×107 m s–1 (1J = 1 kg m2 s–2)
= 5.79×106 m s–1
Problem 2.16 
A golf ball has a mass of 40g, and a speed 
of 45 m/s. If the speed can be measured 
within accuracy of 2%, calculate the 
uncertainty in the position.
Solution
The uncertainty in the speed is 2%, i.e., 
Using the equation (2.22)
= 1.46×10–33 m
This is nearly ~ 1018 times smaller 
than the diameter of a typical atomic 
nucleus. As mentioned earlier for large 
particles, the uncertainty principle sets 
no meaningful limit to the precision of 
measurements.
Reasons for the Failure of the Bohr Model
One can now understand the reasons for the 
failure of the Bohr model. In  Bohr model, 
an electron is regarded as a charged particle 
moving  in well defined circular orbits about 
the nucleus. The wave character of the 
electron is not considered in  Bohr model. 
Further, an orbit is a clearly defined path 
and this path can completely be defined 
only if both the position and the velocity of 
the electron are known exactly at the same 
time. This is not possible according to the 
Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Bohr model 
of the hydrogen atom, therefore, not only 
ignores dual behaviour of matter but also 
contradicts Heisenberg uncertainty principle. 
Problem 2.15
A microscope using suitable photons is 
employed to locate an electron in an atom 
within a distance of 0.1 Å. What is the 
uncertainty involved in the measurement 
of its velocity?
Solution
∆ x ∆p = 
 or ∆ x m ∆ v 
 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 25 :
 53
structure of atom
In view of these inherent weaknesses in the 
Bohr model, there was no point in extending 
Bohr model to other atoms. In fact an insight 
into the structure of the atom was needed 
which could account for wave-particle duality 
of matter and be consistent with Heisenberg 
uncertainty principle. This came with the 
advent of quantum mechanics.
2.6 	 Quantum Mechanical Model of 
Atom
Classical mechanics, based on Newton’s 
laws of motion, successfully describes the 
motion of all macroscopic objects such as a 
falling stone, orbiting planets etc., which have 
essentially a particle-like behaviour as shown 
in the previous section. However it fails when 
applied to microscopic objects like electrons, 
atoms, molecules etc. This is mainly because 
of the fact that classical mechanics ignores 
the concept of dual behaviour of matter 
especially for sub-atomic particles and the 
uncertainty principle. The branch of science 
that takes into account  this dual behaviour 
of matter is called quantum mechanics. 
Quantum mechanics is a theoretical 
science that deals with the study of the 
motions of the microscopic objects that have 
both observable wave like and particle like 
properties. It specifies the laws of motion that 
these objects obey. When quantum mechanics 
is applied to macroscopic objects (for which 
wave like properties are insignificant) the 
results are the same as those from the 
classical mechanics. 
Quantum mechanics was developed 
independently in 1926 by Werner Heisenberg 
and Erwin Schrödinger. Here, however, we 
shall be discussing the quantum mechanics 
which is based on the ideas of wave motion. 
The fundamental equation of quantum 
mechanics was developed by Schrödinger 
and it won him the Nobel Prize in Physics in 
1933. This equation which incorporates wave-
particle duality of matter as proposed by de 
Broglie is quite complex and knowledge of 
higher mathematics  is needed to solve it. You 
will learn its solutions for different systems 
in higher classes. 
For a system (such as an atom or a 
molecule whose energy does not change with 
time) the Schrödinger equation is written 
as 
 where 
 is a mathematical 
operator called Hamiltonian. Schrödinger 
gave a recipe of constructing this operator 
from the expression for the total energy of 
the system. The total energy of the system 
takes into account the kinetic energies of all 
the sub-atomic particles (electrons, nuclei), 
attractive potential between the electrons 
and nuclei and repulsive potential among the 
electrons and nuclei individually. Solution of 
this equation gives E and ψ.
Hydrogen Atom and the Schrödinger 
Equation
When Schrödinger equation is solved for 
hydrogen atom, the solution gives the possible 
energy levels the electron can occupy and 
the corresponding wave function(s) (ψ) of 
the electron associated with each energy 
level. These quantized energy states and 
corresponding wave functions which are 
characterized by a set of three quantum 
numbers (principal quantum number 
n, azimuthal quantum number l and 
magnetic quantum number ml ) arise as a 
natural consequence in the solution of the 
Schrödinger equation. When an electron 
is in any energy state, the wave function 
Erwin Schrödinger, an 
Austrian physicist received 
his Ph.D. in theoretical 
physics from the University 
of Vienna in 1910. In 1927 
Schrödinger succeeded Max 
Planck at the  University of 
Berlin at Planck’s request. 
In 1933, Schrödinger left 
Berlin because of his 
opposition to Hitler and 
Nazi policies and returned 
to Austria in 1936. After the invasion of Austria 
by Germany, Schrödinger was forcibly removed 
from his professorship. He then moved to Dublin, 
Ireland where he remained for seventeen years. 
Schrödinger shared the Nobel Prize for Physics 
with P.A.M. Dirac in 1933.
Erwin Schrödinger 
(1887–1961)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 26 :
 54
chemistry
corresponding to that energy state contains 
all information about the electron. The wave 
function is a mathematical function whose 
value depends upon the coordinates of the 
electron in the atom and does not carry any 
physical meaning. Such wave functions of 
hydrogen or hydrogen like species with one 
electron are called atomic orbitals. Such 
wave functions pertaining to one-electron 
species are called one-electron systems. The 
probability of finding an electron at a point 
within an atom is proportional to the |ψ|2 at 
that point.  The quantum mechanical results 
of the hydrogen atom successfully predict 
all aspects of the hydrogen atom spectrum 
including some phenomena that could not be 
explained by the Bohr model.
Application of  Schrödinger equation to 
multi-electron atoms presents a difficulty: the 
Schrödinger equation cannot be solved exactly 
for a multi-electron atom. This difficulty can 
be overcome by using approximate methods. 
Such calculations with the aid of modern 
computers show that orbitals in atoms other 
than hydrogen do not differ in any radical 
way from the hydrogen orbitals discussed 
above. The principal difference lies in the 
consequence of increased nuclear charge. 
Because of this  all the orbitals are somewhat 
contracted. Further, as you shall see later (in 
subsections 2.6.3 and 2.6.4), unlike orbitals 
of hydrogen or hydrogen like species, whose 
energies depend only on the quantum number 
n, the energies of the orbitals in multi-electron 
atoms depend on quantum numbers n and l.
Important Features of the Quantum 
Mechanical Model of Atom
Quantum mechanical model of atom is 
the picture of the structure of the atom, 
which emerges from the application of 
the Schrödinger equation to atoms. The 
following are the important features of the 
quantum-mechanical model of atom:
1.	
The energy of electrons in atoms is 
quantized (i.e., can only have certain 
specific values), for example when 
electrons are bound to the nucleus in 
atoms.
2.	
The existence of quantised electronic 
energy levels is a direct result of the 
wave like properties of electrons and 
are allowed solutions of Schrödinger 
wave equation.
3.	
Both the exact position and exact 
velocity of an electron in an atom 
cannot be determined simultaneously 
(Heisenberg uncertainty principle). The 
path of an electron in an atom  therefore, 
can never be determined or known 
accurately. That is why, as you shall see 
later on, one talks of only probability of 
finding the electron at different points in  
an atom.
4.	
An atomic orbital is the wave 
function ψ for an electron in an atom. 
Whenever an electron is described 
by a wave function, we say that the 
electron occupies that orbital. Since 
many such wave functions are possible 
for an electron, there are many atomic 
orbitals in an atom. These “one electron 
orbital wave functions” or orbitals form 
the basis of the electronic structure 
of atoms. In each orbital, the electron 
has a definite energy. An orbital cannot 
contain more than two electrons. In a 
multi-electron atom, the electrons are 
filled in various orbitals in the order of 
increasing energy. For each electron 
of a multi-electron atom, there shall, 
therefore, be an orbital wave function 
characteristic of the orbital it occupies. 
All the information about the electron 
in an atom is stored in its orbital wave 
function ψ and quantum mechanics 
makes it possible to extract this 
information out of ψ.
5. 
The probability of finding an electron at 
a point within an atom is proportional to 
the square of the orbital wave function 
i.e., |ψ|2 at that point. |ψ|2 is known 
as probability density and is always 
positive. From the value of |ψ|2 at 
different points within an atom, 
it is possible to predict the region 
around the nucleus where electron 
will most probably be found.
2.6.1	 Orbitals and Quantum Numbers 
A large number of orbitals are possible in 
an atom. Qualitatively these orbitals can 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 27 :
 55
structure of atom
be distinguished by their size, shape and 
orientation. An orbital of smaller size means 
there is more chance of finding the electron 
near the nucleus. Similarly shape and 
orientation mean that there is more probability 
of finding the electron along certain directions 
than along others. Atomic orbitals are precisely 
distinguished by what are known as quantum 
numbers. Each orbital is designated by three 
quantum numbers labelled as n, l and ml. 
The principal quantum number ‘n’ is a 
positive integer with value of n = 1,2,3....... 
The principal quantum number determines 
the size and to large extent the energy of the 
orbital. For hydrogen atom and hydrogen like 
species (He+, Li2+, .... etc.) energy and size of 
the orbital depends only on ‘n’.
The principal quantum number also 
identifies the shell. With the increase in the 
value of ‘n’, the number of allowed orbital 
increases and are given by ‘n2’ All the 
orbitals of a given value of ‘n’ constitute 
a single shell of atom and are represented 
by the following letters
      n =  1   2   3   4   ............ 
Shell =   K  L  M  N ............ 
Size of an orbital increases with increase of 
principal quantum number ‘n’. In other words 
the electron will be located away from the 
nucleus. Since energy is required in shifting 
away the negatively charged electron from the 
positively charged nucleus, the energy of the 
orbital will increase with increase of n. 
Azimuthal quantum number. ‘l’ is also 
known as orbital angular momentum or 
subsidiary quantum number. It defines the 
three-dimensional shape of the orbital. For a 
given value of n, l  can have n values ranging 
from 0 to n – 1, that is, for a given value of n, 
the possible value of l are : l = 0, 1, 2, .......... 
(n–1)
For example, when n = 1, value of l is only 
0. For n = 2, the possible value of l can be 0 
and 1. For n = 3, the possible l values are 0, 
1 and 2.
Each shell consists of one or more  
sub-shells or sub-levels. The number of  
sub-shells in a principal shell is equal to the 
value of n. For example in the first shell (n = 1), 
there is only one sub-shell which corresponds 
to l = 0. There are two sub-shells (l = 0, 1) in 
the second shell (n = 2), three (l = 0, 1, 2) in 
third shell (n = 3) and so on. Each sub-shell is 
assigned an azimuthal quantum number (l). 
Sub-shells corresponding to different values 
of l are represented by the following symbols.
Value for l :	
0   1	
2   3	
4   5	
............
notation for 	 s   p	
d   f	
g   h	
............
sub-shell 
Table 2.4 shows the permissible values of 
‘l ’ for a given principal quantum number and 
the corresponding sub-shell notation.
Magnetic orbital quantum number. 
‘ml’ gives information about the spatial 
orientation of the orbital with respect to 
standard set of co-ordinate axis. For any 
sub-shell (defined by ‘l’ value) 2l+1 values of 
ml are possible and these values are given by :
ml  = – l, – (l–1), – (l–2)... 0,1... (l–2), (l–1), l 
Thus for l = 0, the only permitted value 
of ml = 0, [2(0)+1 = 1, one s orbital]. For l = 
1, ml can be –1, 0 and +1 [2(1)+1 = 3, three p 
orbitals]. For l = 2, ml = –2, –1, 0, +1 and +2, 
[2(2)+1 = 5, five d orbitals]. It should be noted 
that the values of ml are derived from l and 
that the value of l are derived from n.
Table 2.4  Subshell Notations
n
l
Subshell notation
1
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
0
0
1
0
1
2
0
1
2
3
1s
2s
2p
3s
3p
3d
4s
4p
4d
4f
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 28 :
 56
chemistry
Each orbital in an atom, therefore, is 
defined by a set of values for n, l and ml. An 
orbital described by the quantum numbers  
n = 2, l = 1, ml = 0 is an orbital in the p sub-
shell of the second shell. The following chart 
gives the relation between the subshell and 
the number of orbitals associated with it.
Value of l
0
1
2
3
4
5
Subshell notation
s
p
d
f
g
h
number of orbitals
1
3
5
7
9
11
Electron spin ‘s’ : The three quantum 
numbers labelling an atomic orbital can be 
used equally well to define its energy, shape 
and orientation. But all these quantum 
numbers are not enough to explain the line 
spectra observed in the case of multi-electron 
atoms, that is, some of the lines actually occur 
in doublets (two lines closely spaced), triplets 
(three lines, closely spaced) etc. This suggests 
the presence of a few more energy levels than 
predicted by the three quantum numbers.
In 1925, George Uhlenbeck and Samuel 
Goudsmit proposed the presence of the fourth 
quantum number known as the electron 
spin quantum number (ms). An electron 
spins around its own axis, much in a similar 
way as earth spins around its own axis while 
revolving around the sun. In other words, 
an electron has, besides charge and mass, 
intrinsic spin angular quantum number. Spin 
angular momentum of the electron — a vector 
quantity, can have two orientations relative to 
the chosen axis. These two orientations are 
distinguished by the spin quantum numbers 
ms which can take the values of +½ or –½. 
These are called the two spin states of the 
electron and are normally represented by 
two arrows, ↑ (spin up) and ↓ (spin down). Two 
electrons that have different ms values (one +½ 
and the other –½) are said to have opposite 
spins. An orbital cannot hold more than two 
electrons and these two electrons should have 
opposite spins.
To sum up, the four quantum numbers 
provide the following information :
i)	
n defines the shell,  determines the size 
of the orbital and also to a large extent 
the energy of the orbital.
ii)	
There are n subshells in the nth shell. l 
identifies the subshell and determines 
the shape of the orbital (see section 
2.6.2). There are (2l+1) orbitals of each 
type in a subshell, that is, one s orbital 
(l = 0), three p orbitals (l = 1) and five 
d orbitals (l = 2) per subshell. To some 
extent l also determines the energy of 
the orbital in a multi-electron atom.
iii)	
ml designates the orientation of the 
orbital. For a given value of l, ml has 
(2l+1) values, the same as the number 
of orbitals per subshell. It means that 
Orbit, orbital and its importance
Orbit and orbital are not synonymous. An orbit, as proposed by Bohr, is a circular path around the 
nucleus in which an electron moves. A precise description of this path of the electron is impossible 
according to Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Bohr orbits, therefore, have no real meaning and 
their existence can never be demonstrated experimentally. An atomic orbital, on the other hand, 
is a quantum mechanical concept and refers to the one electron wave function ψ in an atom. It is 
characterized by three quantum numbers (n, l and ml) and its value depends upon the coordinates 
of the electron. ψ has, by itself, no physical meaning. It is the square of the wave function i.e., |ψ|2 
which has a physical meaning. |ψ|2 at any point in an atom gives the value of probability density 
at that point. Probability density (|ψ|2) is the probability per unit volume and the product of |ψ|2 
and a small volume (called a volume element) yields the probability of finding the electron in that 
volume (the reason for specifying a small volume element is that |ψ|2 varies from one region to 
another in space but its value can be assumed to be constant within a small volume element). 
The total probability of finding the electron in a given volume can then be calculated by the sum 
of all the products of |ψ|2 and the corresponding volume elements. It is thus possible to get the 
probable distribution of an electron in an orbital.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 29 :
 57
structure of atom
the number of orbitals is equal to the 
number of ways in which they are 
oriented. 
iv)	
ms refers to orientation of the spin of the 
electron.
According to the German physicist, 
Max Born, the square of the wave function  
(i.e.,ψ 2) at a point gives the probability density 
of the electron at that point. The variation 
of ψ 2 as a function of r for 1s and 2s orbitals 
is given in Fig. 2.12(b). Here again, you may 
note that the curves for 1s and 2s orbitals 
are different.
It may be noted that for 1s orbital the 
probability density is maximum at the 
nucleus and it decreases sharply as we move 
away from it. On the other hand, for 2s 
orbital the probability density first decreases 
sharply to zero and again starts increasing. 
After reaching a small maxima it decreases 
again and approaches zero as the value of 
r increases further. The region where this 
probability density function reduces to zero 
is called nodal surfaces or simply nodes. 
In general, it has been found that ns-orbital 
has (n – 1) nodes, that is, number of nodes 
increases with increase of principal quantum 
number n. In other words, number of nodes 
for 2s orbital is one, two for 3s and so on.
These probability density variation can be 
visualised in terms of charge cloud diagrams 
[Fig. 2.13(a)]. In these diagrams, the density 
Fig. 2.12	 The plots of (a) the orbital wave  
function ψ(r); (b) the variation of 
probability density ψ2(r) as a function 
of distance r of the electron from the 
nucleus for 1s and 2s orbitals. 
Problem 2.17 
What is the total number of orbitals 
associated with the principal quantum 
number n = 3 ?
Solution
For n = 3, the possible values of l are 
0, 1 and 2. Thus there is one 3s orbital  
(n = 3, l = 0 and ml = 0); there are three 
3p orbitals (n = 3, l = 1 and ml = –1, 0, 
+1); there are five 3d orbitals (n = 3, l = 
2 and ml = –2, –1, 0, +1+, +2).
Therefore, the total number of orbitals 
is 1+3+5 = 9
The same value can also be obtained by 
using the relation; number of orbitals  
= n2, i.e.  32 = 9.
Problem 2.18 
Using s, p, d, f notations, describe the 
orbital with the following quantum 
numbers 
(a) n = 2, l = 1, (b) n = 4, l = 0, (c) n = 5,  
l = 3, (d) n = 3, l = 2
Solution
	
	
n	
  l	
orbital
    a)		
2	
 1	
  2p
    b)		
4	
 0	
  4s
    c)		
5	
 3	
  5f
    d)		
3	
 2	
  3d
2.6.2	 Shapes of Atomic Orbitals
The orbital wave function or ψ for an electron 
in an atom has no physical meaning. It 
is simply a mathematical function of the 
coordinates of the electron. However, for 
different orbitals the plots of corresponding 
wave functions as a function of r (the distance 
from the nucleus) are different. Fig. 2.12(a), 
gives such plots for 1s (n = 1, l = 0) and 2s  
(n = 2, l = 0) orbitals. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 30 :
 58
chemistry
of the dots in a region represents electron 
probability density in that region.
Boundary surface diagrams of constant 
probability density for different orbitals give 
a fairly good representation of the shapes 
of the orbitals. In this representation, a 
boundary surface or contour surface is 
drawn in space for an orbital on which the 
value of probability density |ψ|2 is constant. 
In principle many such boundary surfaces 
may be possible. However, for a given 
orbital, only that boundary surface diagram 
of constant probability density* is taken to 
be good representation of the shape of the 
orbital which encloses a region or volume in 
which the probability of finding the electron 
is very high, say, 90%. The boundary surface 
diagram for 1s and 2s orbitals are given in  
Fig. 2.13(b). One may ask a question : Why 
do we not draw a boundary surface diagram, 
which bounds a region in which the probability 
of finding the electron is, 100 %? The answer 
to this question is that the probability density 
|ψ|2 has always some value, howsoever 
small it may be, at any finite distance from 
the nucleus. It is therefore, not possible to 
draw a boundary surface diagram of a rigid 
size in which the probability of finding the 
electron is 100%. Boundary surface diagram 
for a s orbital is actually a sphere centred on 
the nucleus. In two dimensions, this sphere 
looks like a circle. It encloses a region in 
which probability of finding the electron is 
about 90%.
Thus, we see that 1s and 2s orbitals are 
spherical in shape. In reality all the s-orbitals 
are spherically symmetric, that is, the 
probability of finding the electron at a given 
distance is equal in all the directions. It is also 
observed that the size of the s orbital increases 
with increase in n, that is, 4s > 3s > 2s > 1s 
and the electron is located further away from 
the nucleus as the principal quantum number 
increases.
Boundary surface diagrams for three 
2p orbitals (l = 1) are shown in Fig. 2.14. In 
these diagrams, the nucleus is at the origin. 
Here, unlike s-orbitals, the boundary surface 
diagrams are not spherical. Instead each  
p orbital consists of two sections called lobes 
that are on either side of the plane that passes 
through the nucleus. The probability density 
*	 If probability density |ψ|2 is constant on a given surface, |ψ| is also constant over the surface. The boundary surface 
for |ψ|2 and |ψ| are identical.
Fig. 2.14	 Boundary surface diagrams of the 
three 2p orbitals.
Fig. 2.13	 (a) Probability density plots of 1s and 
2s atomic orbitals. The density of the 
dots represents the probability density 
of finding the electron in that region.  
(b) Boundary surface diagram for 1s 
and 2s orbitals.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 31 :
 59
structure of atom
function is zero on the plane where the two 
lobes touch each other. The size, shape and 
energy of the three orbitals are identical. 
They differ however, in the way the lobes are 
oriented. Since the lobes may be considered to 
lie along the x, y or z axis, they are given the 
designations 2px, 2py, and 2pz. It should be 
understood, however, that there is no simple 
relation between the values of ml (–1, 0 and +1) 
and the x, y and z directions. For our purpose, 
it is sufficient to remember that, because 
there are three possible values of ml, there 
are, therefore, three p orbitals whose axes 
are mutually perpendicular. Like s orbitals, 
p orbitals increase in size and energy with 
increase in the principal quantum number 
and hence the order of the energy and size of 
various p orbitals is 4p > 3p > 2p. Further, like 
s orbitals, the probability density functions for 
p-orbital also pass through value zero, besides 
at zero and infinite distance, as the distance 
from the nucleus increases. The number of 
nodes are given by the n –2, that is number 
of radial node is 1 for 3p orbital, two for 4p 
orbital and so on.
For l = 2, the orbital is known as d-orbital 
and the minimum value of principal quantum 
number (n) has to be 3. as the value of l cannot 
be greater than n–1. There are five ml values 
(–2, –1, 0, +1 and +2) for l = 2 and thus there 
are five d orbitals. The boundary surface 
diagram of d orbitals are shown in Fig. 2.15.
The five d-orbitals are designated as dxy, 
dyz, dxz, dx2–y2 and dz2. The shapes of the first 
four d-orbitals are similar to each other, where 
as that of the fifth one, dz2, is different from 
others, but all five 3d orbitals are equivalent 
in energy. The d orbitals for which n is greater 
than 3 (4d, 5d...) also have shapes similar to 
3d orbital, but differ in energy and size.
Besides the radial nodes (i.e., probability 
density function is zero), the probability 
density functions for the np and nd orbitals 
are zero at the plane (s), passing through the 
nucleus (origin). For example, in case of pz 
orbital, xy-plane is a nodal plane, in case of 
dxy orbital, there are two nodal planes passing 
through the origin and bisecting the xy plane 
containing z-axis. These are called angular 
nodes and number of angular nodes are given 
by ‘l’, i.e., one angular node for p orbitals, two 
angular nodes for ‘d’ orbitals and so on. The 
total number of nodes are given by (n–1), 
i.e., sum of l angular nodes and (n – l – 1) 
radial nodes.
2.6.3 Energies of Orbitals
The energy of an electron in a hydrogen atom 
is determined solely by the principal quantum 
Fig. 2.15	 Boundary surface diagrams of the five 
3d orbitals.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 32 :
 60
chemistry
number. Thus the energy of the orbitals in 
hydrogen atom  increases as follows :
1s < 2s = 2p < 3s = 3p = 3d <4s = 4p = 4d 
= 4f <                                            	  (2.23) 
and is depicted in Fig. 2.16. Although the 
shapes of 2s and 2p orbitals are different, 
an electron has the same energy when it is 
in the 2s orbital as when it is present in 2p 
orbital. The orbitals having the same energy 
are called degenerate. The 1s orbital in a 
hydrogen atom, as said earlier, corresponds 
to the most stable condition and is called the 
ground state and an electron residing in this 
orbital is most strongly held by the nucleus. 
An electron in the 2s, 2p or higher orbitals in 
a hydrogen atom is in excited state.
The energy of an electron in a multi- 
electron atom, unlike that of the hydrogen 
atom, depends not only on its principal 
quantum number (shell), but also on its 
azimuthal quantum number (subshell). That 
is, for a given principal quantum number, s,  
p, d, f ... all have different energies. Within 
a given principal quantum number, the 
energy of orbitals increases in the order 
s<p<d<f. For higher energy levels, these 
differences are sufficiently pronounced and 
straggering of orbital energy may result, 
e.g., 4s<3d and 6s<5d; 4f<6p. The main 
reason for having different energies of the 
subshells is the mutual repulsion among the 
electrons in multi-electron atoms. The only 
electrical interaction present in hydrogen 
atom is the attraction between the negatively 
charged electron and the positively charged 
nucleus. In multi-electron atoms, besides the 
presence of attraction between the electron 
and nucleus, there are repulsion terms 
between every electron and other electrons 
present in the atom. Thus the stability of an 
electron in a multi-electron atom is because 
total attractive interactions are more than 
the repulsive interactions. In general, the 
repulsive interaction of the electrons in the 
outer shell with the electrons in the inner shell 
are more important. On the other hand, the 
attractive interactions of an electron increases 
with increase of positive charge (Ze) on the 
nucleus. Due to the presence of electrons in 
the inner shells, the electron in the outer shell 
will not experience the full positive charge of 
the nucleus (Ze). The effect will be lowered 
due to the partial screening of positive charge 
on the nucleus by the inner shell electrons. 
This is known as the shielding of the outer 
shell electrons from the nucleus  by the 
inner shell electrons, and the net positive 
charge experienced by the outer electrons is 
known as effective nuclear charge (Zeff e). 
Despite the shielding of the outer electrons 
from the nucleus by the inner shell electrons, 
the attractive force experienced by the outer 
shell electrons increases with increase of 
nuclear charge. In other words, the energy of 
interaction between, the nucleus and electron 
Fig. 2.16	 Energy level diagrams for the few 
electronic shells of (a) hydrogen atom 
and (b) multi-electronic atoms. Note that 
orbitals for the same value of principal 
quantum number, have the same 
energies even for different azimuthal 
quantum number for hydrogen atom. 
In case of multi-electron atoms, orbitals 
with same principal quantum number 
possess different energies for different 
azimuthal quantum numbers.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 33 :
 61
structure of atom
(that is orbital energy) decreases (that is  
more negative) with the increase of atomic 
number (Z ).
Both the attractive and repulsive 
interactions depend upon the shell and shape 
of the orbital in which the electron is present. 
For example electrons present in spherical 
shaped, s orbital shields the outer electrons 
from the nucleus more effectively as compared 
to electrons present in p orbital. Similarly 
electrons present in p orbitals shield the outer 
electrons from the nucleus more than the 
electrons present in d orbitals, even though all 
these orbitals are present in the same shell. 
Further within a shell, due to spherical shape 
of s orbital, the s orbital electron spends more 
time close to the nucleus in comparison to p 
orbital electron which spends more time in 
the vicinity of nucleus in comparison to d 
orbital electron. In other words, for a given 
shell (principal quantum number), the Zeff 
experienced by the electron decreases with 
increase of azimuthal quantum number (l), 
that is, the s orbital electron will be more 
tightly bound to the nucleus than p orbital 
electron which in turn will be better tightly 
bound than the d orbital electron. The energy 
of electrons in s orbital will be lower (more 
negative) than that of p orbital electron 
which will have less energy than that of d 
orbital electron and so on. Since the extent 
of shielding from the nucleus is different for 
electrons in different orbitals, it leads to the 
splitting of energy levels within the same 
shell (or same principal quantum number), 
that is, energy of electron in an orbital, as 
mentioned earlier, depends upon the values 
of n and l. Mathematically, the dependence 
of energies of the orbitals on n and l are quite 
complicated but one simple rule is that, the 
lower the value of (n + l) for an orbital, the 
lower is its energy. If two orbitals have 
the same value of (n + l), the orbital with 
lower value of n will have the lower energy. 
The Table 2.5 illustrates the (n + l ) rule and 
Fig. 2.16 depicts the energy levels of multi-
electrons atoms. It may be noted that different 
subshells of a particular shell have different 
energies in case of multi-electrons atoms. 
However, in hydrogen atom, these have the 
same energy. Lastly it may be mentioned here 
that energies of the orbitals in the same 
subshell decrease with increase in the 
atomic number (Zeff). For example, energy of 
2s orbital of hydrogen atom is greater than 
that of 2s orbital of lithium and that of lithium 
is greater than that of sodium and so on, that 
is, E2s(H) > E2s(Li) > E2s(Na) > E2s(K).
2.6.4 Filling of Orbitals in Atom
The filling of electrons into the orbitals of 
different atoms takes place according to 
the aufbau principle which is based on the 
Pauli’s exclusion principle, the Hund’s rule 
of maximum multiplicity and the relative 
energies of the orbitals.
Aufbau Principle
The word ‘aufbau’ in German means ‘building 
up’. The building up of orbitals means the 
Table 2.5	
Arrangement of Orbitals with 
Increasing Energy on the Basis 
of (n+l) Rule
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 34 :
 62
chemistry
filling up of orbitals with electrons. The 
principle states : In the ground state of the 
atoms, the orbitals are filled in order of 
their increasing energies. In other words, 
electrons first occupy the lowest energy orbital 
available to them and enter into higher energy 
orbitals only after the lower energy orbitals 
are filled. As you have learnt above, energy 
of a given orbital depends upon effective 
nuclear charge and different type of orbitals 
are affected to different extent. Thus, there 
is no single ordering of energies of orbitals 
which will be universally correct for all atoms.
However, following order of  energies of 
the orbitals is extremely useful:
1s, 2s, 2p, 3s, 3p, 4s, 3d, 4p, 5s, 4d, 5p, 4f, 
5d, 6p, 7s...
The order may be remembered by using 
the method given in Fig. 2.17. Starting from 
the top, the direction of the arrows gives the 
order of filling of orbitals, that is starting 
from right top to bottom left. With respect to 
placement of outermost valence electrons, 
it is remarkably accurate for all atoms. for 
example, valence electron in potassium 
must choose between 3d and 4s orbitals and 
as predicted by this sequence, it is found 
in 4s orbital. The above order should be 
assumed to be a rough guide to the filling 
of energy levels. In many cases, the orbitals 
are similar in energy and small changes in 
atomic structure may bring about a change 
in the order of filling. Even then, the above 
series is a useful guide to the building of the 
electronic structure of an atom provided that 
it is remembered that exceptions may occur.
Pauli Exclusion Principle
The number of electrons to be filled in various 
orbitals is restricted by the exclusion principle, 
given by the Austrian scientist Wolfgang Pauli 
(1926). According to this principle : No two 
electrons in an atom can have the same set 
of four quantum numbers. Pauli exclusion 
principle can also be stated as : “Only two 
electrons may exist in the same orbital and 
these electrons must have opposite spin.” 
This means that the two electrons can have 
the same value of three quantum numbers 
n, l and ml, but must have the opposite spin 
quantum number. The restriction imposed 
by Pauli’s exclusion principle on the number 
of electrons in an orbital helps in calculating 
the capacity of electrons to be present in any 
subshell. For example, subshell 1s comprises 
one orbital and thus the maximum number of 
electrons present in 1s subshell can be two, in 
p and d subshells, the maximum number of 
electrons can be 6 and 10 and so on. This can 
be summed up as : the maximum number 
of electrons in the shell with principal 
quantum number n is equal to 2n2.
Hund’s Rule of Maximum Multiplicity
This rule deals with the filling of electrons into 
the orbitals belonging to the same subshell 
(that is, orbitals of equal energy, called 
degenerate orbitals). It states : pairing of 
Fig.2.17  Order of filling of orbitals
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 35 :
 63
structure of atom
electrons in the orbitals belonging to the 
same subshell (p, d or f) does not take 
place until each orbital belonging to that 
subshell has got one electron each i.e., it 
is singly occupied.
Since there are three p, five d and seven f 
orbitals, therefore, the pairing of electrons will 
start in the p, d and f orbitals with the entry 
of 4th, 6th and 8th electron, respectively. It 
has been observed that half filled and fully 
filled degenerate set of orbitals acquire extra 
stability due to their symmetry (see Section, 
2.6.7).
2.6.5	 Electronic Configuration of Atoms
The distribution of electrons into orbitals of an 
atom is called its electronic configuration. 
If one keeps in mind the basic rules which 
govern the filling of different atomic orbitals, 
the electronic configurations of different 
atoms can be written very easily.
The electronic configuration of different 
atoms can be represented in two ways. For  
example :
(i)	  sa
 pbdc ...... notation
(ii)  Orbital diagram
 
 s	                   p	
                      d
In the first notation, the subshell is 
represented by the respective letter symbol 
and the number of electrons present in the 
subshell is depicted, as the super script, like 
a, b, c, ... etc. The similar subshell represented 
for different shells is differentiated by writing 
the principal quantum number before the 
respective subshell. In the second notation 
each orbital of the subshell is represented 
by a box and the electron is represented by 
an arrow (↑) a positive spin or an arrow (↓) 
a negative spin. The advantage of second 
notation over the first is that it represents all 
the four quantum numbers.
The hydrogen atom has only one electron 
which goes in the orbital with the lowest energy, 
namely 1s. The electronic configuration of the 
hydrogen atom is 1s1 meaning that it has 
one electron in the 1s orbital. The second 
electron in helium (He) can also occupy the 
1s orbital. Its configuration is, therefore, 1s2. 
As mentioned above, the two electrons differ 
from each other with opposite spin, as can be 
seen from the orbital diagram.
The third electron of lithium (Li) is not 
allowed in the 1s orbital because of Pauli 
exclusion principle. It, therefore, takes the 
next available choice, namely the 2s orbital. 
The electronic configuration of Li is 1s22s1. 
The 2s orbital can accommodate one more 
electron. The configuration of beryllium (Be) 
atom is, therefore, 1s2 2s2 (see Table 2.6, 
page 66 for the electronic configurations of 
elements).
In the next six elements—boron  
(B, 1s22s22p1), carbon (C, 1s22s22p2), nitrogen 
(N, 1s22s22p3), oxygen (O, 1s22s22p4), fluorine 
(F, 1s22s22p5) and neon (Ne, 1s22s22p6), the 2p 
orbitals get progressively filled. This process 
is completed with the neon atom. The orbital 
picture of these elements can be represented 
as follows :
The electronic configuration of the 
elements sodium (Na,1s22s22p63s1) to argon 
(Ar,1s22s22p63s23p6), follow exactly the same 
pattern as the elements from lithium to neon 
with the difference that the 3s and 3p orbitals 
are getting filled now. This process can be 
simplified if we represent the total number 
of  electrons in the first two shells by the 
name of element neon (Ne). The electronic 
configuration of the elements from sodium to 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 36 :
 64
chemistry
argon can be written as (Na, [Ne]3s1) to (Ar, 
[Ne] 3s23p6). The electrons in the completely 
filled shells are known as core electrons and 
the electrons that are added to the electronic 
shell with the highest principal quantum 
number are called valence electrons. For 
example, the electrons in Ne are the core 
electrons and the electrons from Na to Ar are 
the valence electrons. In potassium (K) and 
calcium (Ca), the 4s orbital, being lower in 
energy than the 3d orbitals, is occupied by 
one and two electrons respectively.
A new pattern is followed beginning with 
scandium (Sc). The 3d orbital, being lower 
in energy than the 4p orbital, is filled first. 
Consequently, in the next ten elements, 
scandium (Sc), titanium (Ti), vanadium (V), 
chromium (Cr), manganese (Mn), iron (Fe), 
cobalt (Co), nickel (Ni), copper (Cu) and zinc 
(Zn), the five 3d orbitals are progressively 
occupied. We may be puzzled by the fact 
that chromium and copper have five and ten 
electrons in 3d orbitals rather than four and 
nine as their position would have indicated 
with two-electrons in the 4s orbital. The 
reason is that fully filled orbitals and half-
filled orbitals have extra stability (that is, 
lower energy). Thus p3, p6, d5, d10,f 7, f14 etc. 
configurations, which are either half-filled 
or fully filled, are more stable. Chromium 
and copper therefore adopt the d5 and 
d10 configuration (Section 2.6.7)[caution: 
exceptions do exist] 
With the saturation of the 3d orbitals, 
the filling of the 4p orbital starts at gallium 
(Ga) and is complete at krypton (Kr). In the 
next eighteen elements from rubidium (Rb) 
to xenon (Xe), the pattern of filling the 5s, 
4d and 5p orbitals are similar to that of 4s, 
3d and 4p orbitals as discussed above. Then 
comes the turn of the 6s orbital. In caesium 
(Cs) and the barium (Ba), this orbital contains 
one and two electrons, respectively. Then from 
lanthanum (La) to mercury (Hg), the filling up 
of electrons takes place in 4f and 5d orbitals. 
After this, filling of 6p, then 7s and finally 5f 
and 6d orbitals takes place. The elements 
after uranium (U) are all short-lived and all of 
them are produced artificially. The electronic 
configurations of the known elements (as 
determined by spectroscopic methods) are 
tabulated in Table 2.6 (page 66).
One may ask what is the utility of knowing 
the electron configuration? The modern 
approach to the chemistry, infact, depends 
almost entirely on electronic distribution to 
understand and explain chemical behaviour. 
For example, questions like why two or more 
atoms combine to form molecules, why some 
elements are metals while others are non-
metals, why elements like helium and argon 
are not reactive but elements like the halogens 
are reactive, find simple explanation from the 
electronic configuration. These questions have 
no answer in the Daltonian model of atom. 
A detailed understanding of the electronic 
structure of atom is, therefore, very essential 
for getting an insight into the various aspects 
of modern chemical knowledge.
2.6.6	 Stability of Completely Filled and  
	
Half Filled Subshells
The ground state electronic configuration of 
the atom of an element always corresponds to 
the state of the lowest total electronic energy. 
The electronic configurations of most of the 
atoms follow the basic rules given in Section 
2.6.5. However, in certain elements such as 
Cu, or Cr, where the two subshells (4s and 
3d) differ slightly in their energies, an electron 
shifts from a subshell of lower energy (4s) to a 
subshell of higher energy (3d), provided such 
a shift results in all orbitals of the subshell 
of higher energy getting either completely 
filled or half filled. The valence electronic 
configurations of Cr and Cu, therefore, are 
3d5 4s1 and 3d10 4s1 respectively and not 3d4 
4s2 and 3d9 4s2. It has been found that there is 
extra stability associated with these electronic 
configurations.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 37 :
 65
structure of atom
The completely filled and completely  
half-filled subshells are stable due to the 
following reasons:
1. Symmetrical distribution of 
electrons: It is well known that symmetry 
leads to stability. The completely filled 
or half filled subshells have symmetrical 
distribution of electrons in them and 
are therefore more stable. Electrons in 
the same subshell (here 3d) have equal 
energy but different spatial distribution. 
Consequently, their shielding of one-
another is relatively small and the 
electrons are more strongly attracted by 
the nucleus.
2. Exchange Energy : The stabilizing 
effect arises whenever two or more 
electrons with the same spin are present 
in the degenerate orbitals of a subshell. 
These electrons tend to exchange their 
positions and the energy released due to 
this exchange is called exchange energy. 
The number of exchanges that can take 
place is maximum when the subshell 
is either half filled or completely filled 
(Fig. 2.18). As a result the exchange 
energy is maximum and so is the stability.
	
You may note that the exchange 
energy is at the basis of Hund’s rule 
that electrons which enter orbitals of 
equal energy have parallel spins as far 
as possible. In other words, the extra 
stability of half-filled and completely filled 
subshell is  due to: (i) relatively small 
shielding, (ii) smaller coulombic repulsion 
energy, and (iii) larger exchange energy. 
Details about the exchange energy will be 
dealt with in higher classes.
Fig. 2.18	 Possible exchange for a d5 
configuration
Causes of Stability of Completely Filled and Half-filled Subshells
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 38 :
 66
chemistry
Table 2.6  Electronic Configurations of the Elements
* Elements with exceptional electronic configurations
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 39 :
 67
structure of atom
** Elements with atomic number 112 and above have been reported but not yet fully authenticated and named.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 40 :
 68
chemistry
Summary
Atoms are the building blocks of elements. They are the smallest parts of an element that 
chemically react. The first atomic theory, proposed by John Dalton in 1808, regarded atom as 
the ultimate indivisible particle of matter. Towards the end of the nineteenth century, it was 
proved experimentally that atoms are divisible and consist of three fundamental particles: 
electrons, protons and neutrons. The discovery of sub-atomic particles led to the proposal 
of various atomic models to explain the structure of atom.
Thomson in 1898 proposed that an atom consists of uniform sphere of positive electricity 
with electrons embedded into it. This model in which mass of the atom is considered to 
be evenly spread over the atom was proved wrong by Rutherford’s famous alpha-particle 
scattering experiment in 1909. Rutherford concluded that atom is made of a tiny positively 
charged nucleus, at its centre with electrons revolving around it in circular orbits. 
Rutherford model, which resembles the solar system, was no doubt an improvement over 
Thomson model but it could not account for the stability of the atom i.e., why the electron 
does not fall into the nucleus. Further, it was also silent about the electronic structure of 
atoms i.e., about the distribution and relative energies of electrons around the nucleus. The 
difficulties of the Rutherford model were overcome by Niels Bohr in 1913 in his model of the 
hydrogen atom. Bohr postulated that electron moves around the nucleus in circular orbits. 
Only certain orbits can exist and each orbit corresponds to a specific energy. Bohr calculated 
the energy of electron in various orbits and for each orbit predicted the distance between the 
electron and nucleus. Bohr model, though offering a satisfactory model for explaining the 
spectra of the hydrogen atom, could not explain the spectra of multi-electron atoms. The 
reason for this was soon discovered. In Bohr model, an electron is regarded as a charged 
particle moving in a well defined circular orbit about the nucleus. The wave character of 
the electron is ignored in Bohr’s theory. An orbit is a clearly defined path and this path can 
completely be defined only if both the exact position and the exact velocity of the electron 
at the same time are known. This is not possible according to the Heisenberg uncertainty 
principle. Bohr model of the hydrogen atom, therefore, not only ignores the dual behaviour 
of electron but also contradicts Heisenberg uncertainty principle. 
Erwin Schrödinger, in 1926, proposed an equation called Schrödinger equation to 
describe the electron distributions in space and the allowed energy levels in atoms. This 
equation incorporates de Broglie’s concept of wave-particle duality and is consistent with 
Heisenberg uncertainty principle. When Schrödinger equation is solved for the electron in a 
hydrogen atom, the solution gives the possible energy states the electron can occupy [and 
the corresponding wave function(s) (ψ) (which in fact are the mathematical functions) of the 
electron associated with each energy state]. These quantized energy states and corresponding 
wave functions which are characterized by a set of three quantum numbers (principal 
quantum number n, azimuthal quantum number l and magnetic quantum number ml) 
arise as a natural consequence in the solution of the Schrödinger equation. The restrictions 
on the values of these three quantum numbers also come naturally from this solution. The 
quantum mechanical model of the hydrogen atom successfully predicts all aspects of the 
hydrogen atom spectrum including some phenomena that could not be explained by the 
Bohr model.
According to the quantum mechanical model of the atom, the electron distribution of an 
atom containing a number of electrons is divided into shells. The shells, in turn, are thought 
to consist of one or more subshells and subshells are assumed to be composed of one or 
more orbitals, which the electrons occupy. While for hydrogen and hydrogen like systems 
(such as He+, Li2+ etc.) all the orbitals within a given shell have same energy, the energy of 
the orbitals in a multi-electron atom depends upon the values of n and l: The lower the value 
of (n + l ) for an orbital, the lower is its energy. If two orbitals have the same (n + l ) value, 
the orbital with lower value of n has the lower energy. In an atom many such orbitals are 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 41 :
 69
structure of atom
possible and electrons are filled in those orbitals in order of increasing energy in accordance 
with Pauli exclusion principle (no two electrons in an atom can have the same set of four 
quantum numbers) and Hund’s rule of maximum multiplicity (pairing of electrons in the 
orbitals belonging to the same subshell does not take place until each orbital belonging to 
that subshell has got one electron each, i.e., is singly occupied). This forms the basis of the 
electronic structure of atoms.
EXERCISES
2.1	
(i)	 Calculate the number of electrons which will together weigh one gram.
	
(ii)	 Calculate the mass and charge of one mole of electrons.
2.2	
(i)	 Calculate the total number of electrons present in one mole of methane.
	
(ii)	 Find (a) the total number and (b) the total  mass of neutrons in 7 mg of 14C. 	
	
(Assume that mass of a neutron = 1.675 × 10–27 kg).
	
(iii) 	Find (a) the total number and (b) the total mass of protons in 34 mg of NH3 	
	
at STP.
	
	
Will the answer change if the temperature and pressure are changed ?
2.3	
How many neutrons and protons are there in the following nuclei ?
	
6
13C
O
Mg
Fe
Sr
,
,
,
,
 
 
 
 
8
16
12
24
26
56
38
88
2.4	
Write the complete symbol for the atom with the given atomic number (Z) and atomic 
mass (A)
	
(i)	 Z = 17,  A = 35.
	
(ii) 	 Z = 92,  A = 233.
	
(iii)	 Z =  4,   A =  9.
2.5	
Yellow light emitted from a sodium lamp has a wavelength (λ) of 580 nm. Calculate 
the frequency (ν) and wavenumber ( ) of the yellow light.
2.6	
Find energy of each of the photons which 
	
(i)	 correspond to light of frequency 3×1015 Hz.
	
(ii)	 have wavelength of 0.50 Å.
2.7	
Calculate the wavelength, frequency and wavenumber of a light wave whose period 
is 2.0 × 10–10 s.
2.8	
What is the number of photons of light with a wavelength of 4000 pm that provide 
1J of energy?
2.9	
A photon of wavelength 4 × 10–7 m strikes on metal surface, the work function 
of the metal being 2.13 eV. Calculate (i) the energy of the photon (eV),  
(ii) the kinetic energy of the emission, and (iii) the velocity of the photoelectron  
(1 eV= 1.6020 × 10–19 J).
2.10 
Electromagnetic radiation of wavelength 242 nm is just sufficient to ionise the 
sodium atom. Calculate the ionisation energy of sodium in kJ mol–1.
2.11	
A 25 watt bulb emits monochromatic yellow light of wavelength of 0.57µm. 
Calculate the rate of emission of quanta per second.
2.12	
Electrons are emitted with zero velocity from a metal surface when it is exposed to 
radiation of wavelength 6800 Å. Calculate threshold frequency (ν0 ) and work function 
(W0 ) of the metal.
2.13	
What is the wavelength of light emitted when the electron in a hydrogen atom undergoes 
transition from an energy level with n = 4 to an energy level with n = 2? 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 42 :
 70
chemistry
2.14	
How much energy is required to ionise a H atom if  the electron occupies n = 5 orbit? 
Compare your answer with the ionization enthalpy of H atom (energy required to 
remove the electron from n =1 orbit). 
2.15	
What is the maximum number of emission lines when the excited electron of a H 
atom in n = 6 drops to the ground state?
2.16	
(i)	 The energy associated with the first orbit in the hydrogen atom is  
–2.18 × 10–18 J atom–1. What is the energy associated with the fifth orbit? 
 
(ii) Calculate the radius of Bohr’s fifth orbit for hydrogen atom.
2.17	
Calculate the wavenumber for the longest wavelength transition in the Balmer series 
of atomic hydrogen.
2.18	
What is the energy in joules, required to shift the electron of the hydrogen atom from 
the first Bohr orbit to the fifth Bohr orbit and what is the wavelength of the light 
emitted when the electron returns to the ground state? The ground state electron 
energy is –2.18 × 10–11 ergs.
2.19	
The electron energy in hydrogen atom is given by En = (–2.18 × 10–18 )/n2 J. Calculate 
the energy required to remove an electron completely from the n = 2 orbit. What is 
the longest wavelength of light in cm that can be used to cause this transition?
2.20	
Calculate the wavelength of an electron moving with a velocity of 2.05 × 107 m s–1.
2.21	
The mass of an electron is 9.1 × 10–31 kg. If its K.E. is 3.0 × 10–25 J, calculate its 
wavelength.
2.22	
Which of the following are isoelectronic species  i.e., those having the same number 
of electrons? 
	
	
	
Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, S2–, Ar.
2.23 
(i) Write the electronic configurations of the following ions: (a) H– (b) Na+ (c) O2– 
(d) F–
	
(ii)	 What are the atomic numbers of elements whose outermost electrons are 	
represented by (a) 3s1 (b) 2p3 and (c) 3p5 ?
 
(iii) Which atoms are indicated by the following configurations ?
	
	
(a) [He] 2s1  (b) [Ne] 3s2 3p3  (c) [Ar] 4s2 3d1.
2.24	
What is the lowest value of n that allows g orbitals to exist?
2.25	
An electron is in one of the 3d orbitals. Give the possible values of n, l  and ml for 
this electron.
2.26 
An atom of an element contains 29 electrons and 35 neutrons. Deduce (i) the number 
of protons and (ii) the electronic configuration of the element.
2.27	
Give the number of electrons in the species 
 
2.28	
(i)	 An atomic orbital has n = 3. What are the possible values of l and ml ?
	
(ii)	 List the quantum numbers (ml and l) of electrons for 3d orbital.
	
(iii) 	Which of the following orbitals are possible?
	
 	
1p, 2s, 2p and 3f
2.29	
Using s, p, d notations, describe the orbital with the following quantum numbers.
	
(a) n=1, l=0; (b) n = 3; l=1 (c) n = 4; l =2; (d) n=4; l=3.
2.30	
Explain, giving reasons, which of the following sets of quantum numbers are not 
possible.
	
	 (a) 	 n = 0, 	 	
l = 0,	
	
ml  =   0,	
ms = + ½ 
	
	 (b) 	 n = 1, 	 	
l = 0,	
	
ml  =   0, 	
ms = – ½
	
	 (c) 	 n = 1, 	 	
l = 1,	
	
ml  =   0,	
ms = + ½
	
	 (d) 	 n = 2, 	 	
l = 1,	
	
ml  =   0, 	
ms = – ½
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 43 :
 71
structure of atom
	
	 (e)	
n = 3, 	 	
l = 3,	
	
ml  = –3,	
ms = + ½
	
	 (f)	
n = 3, 	 	
l = 1,	
	
ml  =   0,	
ms = + ½
2.31	
How many electrons in an atom may have the following quantum numbers?
	
(a)  n = 4, ms = – ½	
	
	
(b)  n = 3, l = 0
2.32	
Show that the circumference of the Bohr orbit for the hydrogen atom is an integral 
multiple of the de Broglie wavelength associated with the electron revolving around 
the orbit.
2.33	
What transition in the hydrogen spectrum would have the same wavelength as the 
Balmer transition n = 4 to n = 2 of  He+ spectrum ?
2.34	
Calculate the energy required for the process
	
He+ (g)  He2+ (g) + e–
	
The ionization energy for the H atom in the ground state is 2.18 × 10–18 J atom–1
2.35	
If the diameter of a carbon atom is 0.15 nm, calculate the number of carbon atoms 
which can be placed side by side in a straight line across length of scale of length 
20 cm long. 
2.36	
2 ×108 atoms of carbon are arranged side by side. Calculate the radius of carbon 
atom if the length of this arrangement is 2.4 cm.
2.37	
The diameter of zinc atom is 2.6 Å. Calculate (a) radius of zinc atom in pm and  
(b) number of atoms present in a length of 1.6 cm if the zinc atoms are arranged 
side by side lengthwise.
2.38	
A certain particle carries 2.5 × 10–16C of static electric charge. Calculate the number 
of electrons present in it.
2.39	
In Milikan’s experiment, static electric charge on the oil drops has been obtained 
by shining X-rays. If the static electric charge on the oil drop is –1.282 × 10–18C, 
calculate the number of electrons present on it.
2.40	
In Rutherford’s experiment, generally the thin foil of heavy atoms, like gold, platinum 
etc. have been used to be bombarded by the α-particles. If the thin foil of light atoms 
like aluminium etc. is used, what difference would be observed from the above  
results ?
2.41	
Symbols 35
79Br and 79Br can be written, whereas symbols 79
35Br  and 35Br are not 
acceptable. Answer briefly.
2.42	
An element with mass number 81 contains 31.7% more neutrons as compared to 
protons. Assign the atomic symbol.
2.43	
An ion with mass number 37 possesses one unit of negative charge. If the ion 
conatins 11.1% more neutrons than the electrons, find the symbol of the ion.
2.44	
An ion with mass number 56 contains 3 units of positive charge and 30.4% more 
neutrons than electrons. Assign the symbol to this ion.
2.45	
Arrange the following type of radiations in increasing order of frequency: (a) radiation 
from microwave oven (b) amber light from traffic signal (c) radiation from FM radio 
(d) cosmic rays from outer space and (e) X-rays.
2.46	
Nitrogen laser produces a radiation at a wavelength of 337.1 nm. If the number of 
photons emitted is 5.6 × 1024, calculate the power of this laser.
2.47	
Neon gas is generally used in the sign boards. If it emits strongly at 616 nm, 
calculate (a) the frequency of emission, (b) distance traveled by this radiation in  
30 s  (c) energy of quantum and (d) number of quanta present if it produces 2 J of 
energy.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 44 :
 72
chemistry
2.48	
In astronomical observations, signals observed from the distant stars are generally 
weak. If the photon detector receives a total of 3.15 × 10–18 J from the radiations of 
600 nm, calculate the number of photons received by the detector.
2.49	
Lifetimes of the molecules in the excited states are often measured by using pulsed 
radiation source of duration nearly in the nano second range. If the radiation source 
has the duration of 2 ns and the number of photons emitted during the pulse source 
is 2.5 × 1015, calculate the energy of the source.
2.50	
The longest wavelength doublet absorption transition is observed at 589 and 589.6 
nm. Calcualte the frequency of each transition and energy difference between two 
excited states.
2.51	
The work function for caesium atom is 1.9 eV. Calculate (a) the threshold wavelength 
and (b) the threshold frequency of the radiation. If the caesium element is irradiated 
with a wavelength 500 nm, calculate the kinetic energy and the velocity of the ejected 
photoelectron.
2.52	
Following results are observed when sodium metal is irradiated with different 
wavelengths. Calculate (a) threshold wavelength and, (b) Planck’s constant.
	
λ (nm)		
	
500	
450	
400
	
v × 10–5 (cm s–1)	
2.55	
4.35	
5.35
2.53	
The ejection of the photoelectron from the silver metal in the photoelectric effect 
experiment can be stopped by applying the voltage of 0.35 V when the radiation 
256.7 nm is used. Calculate the work function for silver metal.
2.54	
If the photon of the wavelength 150 pm strikes an atom and one of tis inner bound 
electrons is ejected out with a velocity of 1.5 × 107 m s–1, calculate the energy with 
which it is bound to the nucleus.
2.55	
Emission transitions in the Paschen series end at orbit n = 3 and start from orbit n 
and can be represeted as v = 3.29 × 1015 (Hz) [1/32 – 1/n2]
	
Calculate the value of n if the transition is observed at 1285 nm. Find the region of 
the spectrum.
2.56	
Calculate the wavelength for the emission transition if it starts from the orbit having 
radius 1.3225 nm and ends at 211.6 pm. Name the series to which this transition 
belongs and the region of the spectrum.
2.57 
Dual behaviour of matter proposed by de Broglie led to the discovery of electron 
microscope often used for the highly magnified images of biological molecules and 
other type of material. If the velocity of the electron in this microscope is 1.6 × 106 
ms–1, calculate de Broglie wavelength associated with this electron.
2.58	
Similar to electron diffraction, neutron diffraction microscope is also used for the 
determination of the structure of molecules. If the wavelength used here is 800 pm, 
calculate the characteristic velocity associated with the neutron.
2.59 
If the velocity of the electron in Bohr’s first orbit is 2.19 × 106 ms–1, calculate the  
de Broglie wavelength associated with it.
2.60	
The velocity associated with a proton moving in a potential difference of 1000 V 
is 4.37 × 105 ms–1. If the hockey ball of mass 0.1 kg is moving with this velocity, 
calcualte the wavelength associated with this velocity.
2.61	
If the position of the electron is measured within an accuracy of + 0.002 nm, calculate 
the uncertainty in the momentum of the electron. Suppose the momentum of the 
electron is h/4πm × 0.05 nm, is there any problem in defining this value.
2.62	
The quantum numbers of six electrons are given below. Arrange them in order of 
increasing energies. If any of these combination(s) has/have the same energy lists:
	
1.	 n = 4, l = 2, ml = –2 , ms = –1/2
	
2.	 n = 3, l = 2, ml = 1 , ms = +1/2
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 45 :
 73
structure of atom
	
3.	 n = 4, l = 1, ml = 0 , ms = +1/2
	
4.	 n = 3, l = 2, ml = –2 , ms = –1/2
	
5.	 n = 3, l = 1, ml = –1 , ms = +1/2
	
6.	 n = 4, l = 1, ml = 0 , ms = +1/2
2.63	
The bromine atom possesses 35 electrons. It contains 6 electrons in 2p orbital,  
6 electrons in 3p orbital and 5 electron in 4p orbital. Which of these electron 
experiences the lowest effective nuclear charge ?
2.64	
Among the following pairs of orbitals which orbital will experience the larger effective 
nuclear charge? (i) 2s and 3s, (ii) 4d and 4f, (iii) 3d and 3p.
2.65	
The unpaired electrons in Al and Si are present in 3p orbital. Which electrons will 
experience more effective nuclear charge from the nucleus ?
2.66	
Indicate the number of unpaired electrons in : (a) P, (b) Si, (c) Cr, (d) Fe and (e) Kr.
2.67	
(a) How many subshells are associated with n = 4 ? (b) How many electrons will be 
present in the subshells having ms value of –1/2 for n = 4 ?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 1 :
 The Periodic Table is arguably the most important concept 
in chemistry, both in principle and in practice. It is the 
everyday support for students, it suggests new avenues 
of research to professionals, and it provides a succinct 
organization of the whole of chemistry. It is a remarkable 
demonstration of the fact that the chemical elements are 
not a random cluster of entities but instead display trends 
and lie together in families. An awareness of the Periodic 
Table is essential to anyone who wishes to disentangle 
the world and see how it is built up from the fundamental 
building blocks of the chemistry, the chemical elements.
	
Glenn T. Seaborg
Unit 3
Classification of Elements and 
Periodicity in Properties
After studying this Unit, you will be 
able to 
• 
appreciate how the concept of 
grouping elements in accordance 
to their properties led to the 
development of Periodic Table.
• 
understand  the Periodic Law; 
• understand the  significance of 
atomic number and electronic 
configuration as the basis for 
periodic classification;
• 
n a m e  t h e  e l e m e n t s  w i t h  
Z >100 according to IUPAC 
nomenclature; 
• 
classify elements into s, p, d, 
f blocks and learn their main 
characteristics;
• 
recognise the periodic trends in 
physical and chemical properties 
of elements;
• 
compare the reactivity of elements 
and correlate it with their 
occurrence in nature;
• 
explain the relationship  between 
ionization enthalpy and metallic 
character;
• 
use  scientific  vocabulary 
appropriately to communicate 
ideas related to certain important 
p r o p e r t i e s  o f  a t o m s  e . g . , 
atomic/ionic radii, ionization 
enthalpy, electron gain enthalpy, 
electronegativity, valence of 
elements.	
In this Unit, we will study the historical development of the 
Periodic Table as it stands today and the Modern Periodic 
Law. We will also learn how the periodic classification 
follows as a logical consequence of the electronic 
configuration of atoms. Finally, we shall examine some of 
the periodic trends in the physical and chemical properties 
of the elements.
3.1	
WHY DO WE NEED TO CLASSIFY ELEMENTS ?
We know by now that the elements are the basic units of 
all types of matter. In 1800, only 31 elements were known. 
By  1865, the number of identified elements had more than 
doubled to 63. At present 114 elements are known. Of 
them, the recently discovered elements are man-made. 
Efforts to synthesise new elements are continuing. With 
such a large number of elements it is very difficult to 
study individually the chemistry of all these elements and 
their innumerable compounds individually. To ease out 
this problem, scientists searched for a systematic way to 
organise their knowledge by classifying the elements. Not 
only that it would rationalize known chemical facts about 
elements, but even predict new ones for undertaking 
further study.	
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 2 :
 75
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties
3.2	
GENESIS OF PERIODIC 
CLASSIFICATION
Classification of elements into groups and 
development of Periodic Law and Periodic 
Table are the consequences of systematising 
the knowledge gained by a number of 
scientists through their observations and 
experiments. The German chemist, Johann 
Dobereiner in early 1800’s was the first to 
consider the idea of trends among properties 
of elements. By 1829 he noted a similarity 
among the physical and chemical properties 
of several groups of three elements (Triads). In 
each case, he noticed that the middle  element 
of each of the Triads had an atomic weight 
about half way between the atomic weights of 
the other two (Table 3.1). Also the properties 
of the middle element were in between those 
of the other two members. Since Dobereiner’s 
the periodic recurrence of properties. This 
also did not attract much attention. The 
English chemist, John Alexander Newlands 
in 1865 profounded the Law of Octaves. He 
arranged the elements in increasing order 
of their atomic weights and noted that every 
eighth element had properties similar to the 
first element (Table 3.2). The relationship was 
just like every eighth note that resembles the 
first in octaves of music. Newlands’s Law of 
Octaves seemed to be true only for elements 
up to calcium. Although his idea was not 
widely accepted at that time, he, for his work, 
was later awarded Davy Medal in 1887 by the 
Royal Society, London.
The Periodic Law, as we know it today 
owes its development to the Russian chemist, 
Dmitri Mendeleev (1834-1907) and the 
German chemist, Lothar Meyer (1830-1895). 
Table 3.1  Dobereiner’s Triads
Element
Atomic 
weight
Element
Atomic 
weight
Element
Atomic 
weight
Li
Na
K
7
23
39
Ca
Sr
Ba
40
88
137
Cl
Br
I
35.5
80
127
  Table 3.2  Newlands’ Octaves
Element
Li
Be
B
C
N
O
F
At. wt.
7
9
11
12
14
16
19
Element
Na
Mg
Al
Si
P
S
Cl
At. wt.
23
24
27
29
31
32
35.5
Element
K
Ca
At. wt.
39
40
relationship, referred to as the Law of Triads, 
seemed to work only for a few elements, it was 
dismissed as coincidence. The next reported 
attempt to classify elements was made by a 
French geologist, A.E.B. de Chancourtois in 
1862. He arranged the then known elements 
in order of increasing atomic weights and 
made a cylindrical table of elements to display 
Working independently, both the chemists in 
1869 proposed that on arranging elements in  
the increasing order of their atomic weights, 
similarities appear in physical and chemical 
properties at regular intervals. Lothar Meyer 
plotted the physical properties such as 
atomic volume, melting point and boiling 
point against atomic weight and obtained 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 3 :
 76
chemistry
a periodically repeated pattern. Unlike 
Newlands, Lothar Meyer observed a change 
in length of that repeating pattern. By 1868, 
Lothar Meyer had developed a table of the 
elements that closely resembles the Modern 
Periodic Table. However, his work was not 
published until after the work of Dmitri 
Mendeleev, the scientist who is generally 
credited with the development of the Modern 
Periodic Table.
While Dobereiner initiated the study of 
periodic relationship, it was Mendeleev who 
was responsible for publishing the Periodic 
Law for the first time. It states as follows :
The properties of the elements are 
a periodic function of their atomic 
weights.
Mendeleev arranged elements in horizontal 
rows and vertical columns of a table in order 
of their increasing atomic weights in such a 
way that the elements with similar properties 
occupied the same vertical column or group. 
Mendeleev’s system of classifying elements 
was more elaborate than that of Lothar 
Meyer’s. He fully recognized the significance 
of periodicity and used broader range of 
physical and chemical properties to classify 
the elements. In particular, Mendeleev relied 
on the similarities in the empirical formulas 
and properties of the compounds formed by 
the elements. He realized that some of the 
elements did not fit in with his scheme of 
classification if the order of atomic weight 
was strictly followed. He ignored the order 
of atomic weights, thinking that the atomic 
measurements might be incorrect, and placed 
the elements with similar properties together. 
For example, iodine with lower atomic weight 
than that of tellurium (Group VI) was placed 
in Group VII along with fluorine, chlorine, 
bromine because of similarities in properties 
(Fig. 3.1). At the same time, keeping his 
primary aim of arranging the elements of 
similar properties in the same group, he 
proposed that some of the elements were 
still undiscovered and, therefore, left several 
gaps in the table. For example, both gallium 
and germanium were unknown at the time 
Mendeleev published his Periodic Table. 
He left the gap under aluminium and a gap 
under silicon, and called these elements 
Eka-Aluminium and Eka-Silicon. Mendeleev 
predicted not only the existence of gallium and 
germanium, but also described some of their 
general physical properties.  These elements 
were discovered later. Some of the properties 
predicted by Mendeleev for these elements 
and those found experimentally are listed in  
Table 3.3. 
The boldness of Mendeleev’s quantitative 
predictions and their eventual success 
made him and his Periodic Table famous. 
Mendeleev’s Periodic Table published in 1905 
is shown in Fig. 3.1.
Table 3.3	
Mendeleev’s Predictions for the Elements Eka-aluminium (Gallium) and  
Eka-silicon (Germanium)
Property
Eka-aluminium 
(predicted)
Gallium 
(found)
Eka-silicon 
(predicted)
Germanium 
(found)
Atomic weight
68
70
72
72.6
Density/(g/cm3)
5.9
5.94
5.5
5.36
Melting point/K
Low
302.93
High
1231
Formula of oxide
E2O3
Ga2O3
EO2
GeO2
Formula of chloride
E Cl3
GaCl3
ECl4
GeCl4
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 4 :
 77
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties
PERIODIC SYSTEM OF THE ELEMENTS IN GROUPS AND SERIES
Fig. 3.1   Mendeleev’s Periodic Table published earlier
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 5 :
 78
chemistry
3.3	
MODERN PERIODIC LAW AND THE 
PRESENT FORM OF THE PERIODIC 
TABLE
We must bear in mind that when Mendeleev 
developed his Periodic Table, chemists 
knew nothing about the internal structure 
of atom. However, the beginning of the 20th 
century witnessed profound developments 
in theories about sub-atomic particles. In 
1913, the English physicist, Henry Moseley 
observed regularities in the characteristic 
X-ray spectra of the elements. A plot of 
 
(where 
 is frequency of X-rays emitted) 
against atomic number (Z) gave a straight 
line and not the plot of 
 vs atomic mass. 
He thereby showed that the atomic number 
is a more fundamental property of an element 
than its atomic mass. Mendeleev’s Periodic 
Law was, therefore, accordingly modified. This 
is known as the Modern Periodic Law and 
can be stated as :
The physical and chemical properties 
of the elements are periodic functions 
of their atomic numbers.
The Periodic Law revealed important 
analogies among the 94 naturally occurring 
elements (neptunium and plutonium like 
actinium and protoactinium are also found 
in pitch blende – an ore of uranium). It 
stimulated renewed interest in Inorganic 
Chemistry and has carried into the present 
with the creation of artificially produced 
short-lived elements.
You may recall that the atomic number 
is equal to the nuclear charge (i.e., number 
of protons) or the number of electrons in 
a neutral atom. It is then easy to visualize 
the significance of quantum numbers and 
electronic configurations in periodicity of 
elements. In fact, it is now recognized that the 
Periodic Law is essentially the consequence 
of the periodic variation in electronic 
configurations, which indeed determine the 
physical and chemical properties of elements 
and their compounds.
Numerous forms of Periodic Table have 
been devised from time to time. Some 
forms emphasise chemical reactions and 
valence, whereas others stress the electronic 
configuration of elements. A modern version, 
the so-called “long form” of the Periodic 
Table of the elements (Fig. 3.2), is the most 
convenient and widely used. The horizontal 
rows (which Mendeleev called series) are 
called periods and the vertical columns, 
groups. Elements having similar outer 
electronic configurations in their atoms 
are arranged in vertical columns, referred 
to as groups or families. According to the 
recommendation of International Union of 
Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), the 
groups are numbered from 1 to 18 replacing 
the older notation of groups IA …  VIIA, VIII, 
IB …  VIIB and 0.
There are altogether seven periods. The 
period number corresponds to the highest 
principal quantum number (n) of the elements 
in the period. The first period contains 2 
elements. The subsequent periods consists of 
8, 8, 18, 18 and 32 elements, respectively. The 
seventh period is incomplete and like the sixth 
period would have a theoretical maximum 
(on the basis of quantum numbers) of 32 
elements. In this form of the Periodic Table, 
14 elements of both sixth and seventh periods 
(lanthanoids and actinoids, respectively) are 
placed in separate panels at the bottom*.
3.4	
NOMENCLATURE OF ELEMENTS 
WITH ATOMIC NUMBERS > 100
The naming of the new elements had been 
traditionally the privilege of the discoverer 
(or discoverers) and the suggested name was 
ratified by the IUPAC. In recent years this has 
led to some controversy. The new elements 
with very high atomic numbers are so unstable 
that only minute quantities, sometimes only 
*	 Glenn T. Seaborg’s work in the middle of the 20th century starting with the discovery of plutonium in 1940, followed by 
those of all the transuranium elements from 94 to 102 led to reconfiguration of the periodic table placing the actinoids below 
the lanthanoids. In 1951, Seaborg was awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry for his work. Element 106 has been named 
Seaborgium (Sg) in his honour.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 6 :
 79
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties
Fig. 3.2   Long form of the Periodic Table of the Elements with their atomic numbers and ground state outer electronic 
configurations. The groups are numbered 1-18 in accordance with the 1984 IUPAC recommendations. This 
notation replaces the old numbering scheme of  IA–VIIA, VIII, IB–VIIB and 0 for the elements. 
III A    IV A    V A      VI A    VII A     ← VIII  →       I B       II B
IA      IIA
III B     IV B     V B     VI B     VII B
0
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 7 :
 80
chemistry
a few atoms of them are obtained. Their 
synthesis and characterisation, therefore, 
require highly sophisticated costly equipment 
and laboratory. Such work is carried out with 
competitive spirit only in some laboratories 
in the world. Scientists, before collecting the 
reliable data on the new element, at times 
get tempted to claim for its discovery. For 
example, both American and Soviet scientists 
claimed credit for discovering element 104. 
The Americans named it Rutherfordium 
whereas Soviets named it Kurchatovium. To 
avoid such problems, the IUPAC has made 
recommendation that until a new element’s 
discovery is proved, and its name is officially 
recognised, a systematic nomenclature be 
derived directly from the atomic number of 
the element using the numerical roots for 
0 and numbers 1-9. These are shown in 
Table 3.4. The roots are put together in order of 
digits which make up the atomic number and 
“ium” is added at the end. The IUPAC names 
for elements with Z above 100 are shown in  
Table 3.5.
Table 3.5  Nomenclature of Elements with Atomic Number Above 100
Atomic
Number
Name according to
IUPAC nomenclature
Symbol
IUPAC
Official Name
IUPAC
Symbol
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
Unnilunium
Unnilbium
Unniltrium
Unnilquadium
Unnilpentium
Unnilhexium
Unnilseptium
Unniloctium
Unnilennium
Ununnillium
Unununnium
Ununbium
Ununtrium
Ununquadium
Ununpentium
Ununhexium
Ununseptium
Ununoctium
Unu
Unb
Unt
Unq
Unp
Unh
Uns
Uno
Une
Uun
Uuu
Uub
Uut
Uuq
Uup
Uuh
Uus
Uuo
Mendelevium
Nobelium
Lawrencium
Rutherfordium
Dubnium
Seaborgium
Bohrium
Hassium
Meitnerium
Darmstadtium
Rontgenium
Copernicium
Nihonium
Flerovium
Moscovium
Livermorium
Tennessine
Oganesson
Md
No
Lr
Rf
Db
Sg
Bh
Hs
Mt
Ds
Rg
Cn
 Nh
Fl
Mc
Lv
Ts
Og
Table 3.4	
Notation for IUPAC 
Nomenclature of Elements
Digit
Name
Abbreviation
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
nil
un
bi
tri
quad
pent
hex
sept
oct
enn
n
u
b
t
q
p
h
s
o
e
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 8 :
 81
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties
Thus, the new element first gets a 
temporary name, with symbol consisting 
of three letters. Later permanent name 
and symbol are given by a vote of IUPAC 
representatives from each country. The 
permanent name might reflect the country 
(or state of the country) in which the element 
was discovered, or pay tribute to a notable 
scientist. As of now, elements with atomic 
numbers up to 118 have been discovered. 
Official names of all elements have been 
announced by IUPAC.
Problem 3.1
What would be the IUPAC name and 
symbol for the element with atomic 
number 120?
Solution 
From Table 3.4, the roots for 1, 2 and 0 
are un, bi and nil, respectively. Hence, 
the symbol and the name respectively 
are Ubn and unbinilium.
3.5	
ELECTRONIC CONFIGURATIONS 
OF ELEMENTS AND THE PERIODIC 
TABLE
In the preceding unit we have learnt that an 
electron in an atom is characterised by a set 
of four quantum numbers, and the principal 
quantum number (n ) defines the main energy 
level known as shell. We have also studied 
about the filling of electrons into different 
subshells, also referred to as orbitals (s, p, 
d, f ) in an atom. The distribution of electrons 
into orbitals of an atom is called its electronic 
configuration. An element’s location in the 
Periodic Table reflects the quantum numbers 
of the last orbital filled. In this section we 
will observe a direct connection between the 
electronic configurations of the elements and 
the long form of the Periodic Table.
(a)  Electronic Configurations in Periods
The period indicates the value of n for the 
outermost or valence shell. In other words, 
successive period in the Periodic Table is 
associated with the filling of the next higher 
principal energy level (n = 1, n = 2, etc.). It can 
be readily seen that the number of elements 
in each period is twice the number of atomic 
orbitals available in the energy level that is 
being filled. The first period (n = 1) starts with 
the filling of the lowest level (1s) and therefore 
has two elements — hydrogen (ls1) and helium 
(ls2) when the first shell (K) is completed. The 
second period (n = 2) starts with lithium and the 
third electron enters the 2s orbital. The next 
element, beryllium has four electrons and has 
the electronic configuration 1s22s2. Starting 
from the next element boron, the 2p orbitals 
are filled with electrons when the L shell is 
completed at neon (2s22p6). Thus there are  
8 elements in the second period. The third 
period (n = 3) begins at sodium, and the added 
electron enters a 3s orbital. Successive filling 
of 3s and 3p orbitals gives rise to the third 
period of 8 elements from sodium to argon. The 
fourth period (n = 4) starts at potassium, and 
the added electrons fill up the 4s orbital. Now 
you may note that before the 4p orbital is filled, 
filling up of 3d orbitals becomes energetically 
favourable and we come across the so called 3d 
transition series of elements. This starts from 
scandium (Z = 21) which has the electronic 
configuration 3d14s2. The 3d orbitals are filled 
at zinc (Z=30) with electronic configuration 
3d104s2. The fourth period ends at krypton 
with the filling up of the 4p orbitals. Altogether 
we have 18 elements in this fourth period. The 
fifth period (n = 5) beginning with rubidium 
is similar to the fourth period and contains 
the 4d transition series starting at yttrium  
(Z = 39). This period ends at xenon with the 
filling up of the 5p orbitals. The sixth period 
(n = 6) contains 32 elements and successive 
electrons enter 6s, 4f, 5d and 6p orbitals, in 
the order — filling up of the 4f orbitals begins 
with cerium (Z = 58) and ends at lutetium  
(Z = 71) to give the 4f-inner transition series 
which is called the lanthanoid series. The 
seventh period (n = 7) is similar to the sixth 
period with the successive filling up of the 
7s, 5f, 6d and 7p orbitals and includes most 
of the man-made radioactive elements. This 
period will end at the element with atomic 
number 118 which would belong to the noble 
gas family. Filling up of the 5f orbitals after 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 9 :
 82
chemistry
actinium (Z = 89) gives the 5f-inner transition 
series known as the actinoid series. The 4f- 
and 5f-inner transition series of elements 
are placed separately in the Periodic Table 
to maintain its structure and to preserve the 
principle of classification by keeping elements 
with similar properties in a single column.
Problem 3.2
How would you justify the presence 
of 18 elements in the 5th period of the 
Periodic Table?
Solution
When n = 5, l = 0, 1, 2, 3. The order 
in which the energy of the available 
orbitals 4d, 5s and 5p increases is 5s 
< 4d < 5p. The total number of orbitals 
available are 9. The maximum number 
of electrons that can be accommodated 
is 18; and therefore 18 elements are 
there in the 5th period.
(b) Groupwise Electronic Configurations
Elements in the same vertical column or 
group have similar valence shell electronic 
configurations, the same number of electrons 
in the outer orbitals, and similar properties. 
For example, the Group 1 elements (alkali 
metals) all have ns1 valence shell electronic 
configuration as shown below.
a theoretical foundation for the periodic 
classification. The elements in a vertical column 
of the Periodic Table constitute a group or 
family and exhibit similar chemical behaviour. 
This similarity arises because these elements 
have the same number and same distribution 
of electrons in their outermost orbitals. We 
can classify the elements into four blocks viz.,  
s-block, p-block, d-block and f-block 
depending on the type of atomic orbitals that 
are being filled with electrons. This is illustrated 
in Fig. 3.3. We notice two exceptions to this 
categorisation. Strictly, helium belongs to the  
s-block but its positioning in the p-block 
along with other group 18 elements is 
justified because it has a completely filled 
valence shell (1s2) and as a result, exhibits 
properties characteristic of other noble gases. 
The other exception is hydrogen. It has only 
one s-electron and hence can be placed in  
group 1 (alkali metals). It can also 
gain an electron to achieve a noble gas 
arrangement and hence it can behave 
similar to a group 17 (halogen family) 
elements. Because it is a special case, we 
shall place hydrogen separately at the top of 
the Periodic Table as shown in Fig. 3.2 and 
Fig. 3.3. We will briefly discuss the salient 
features of the four types of elements marked in 
the Periodic Table. More about these elements 
Thus it can be seen that the properties of 
an element have periodic dependence upon 
its atomic number and not on relative atomic 
mass.
3.6	
ELECTRONIC CONFIGURATIONS 
A N D  T Y P E S  O F  E L E M E N T S :  
s-, p-, d-, f- BLOCKS
The aufbau (build up) principle and the 
electronic configuration of atoms provide 
will be discussed later. During the description 
of their features certain terminology has been 
used which has been classified in section 3.7.
3.6.1	 The s-Block Elements
The elements of Group 1 (alkali metals) and 
Group 2 (alkaline earth metals) which have 
ns1 and ns2 outermost electronic configuration 
belong to the s-Block Elements. They are all 
Atomic number
Symbol
Electronic configuration
3
11
19
37
55
87
Li
Na
K
Rb
Cs
Fr
1s22s1 (or) [He]2s1
1s22s22p63s1 (or) [Ne]3s1
1s22s22p63s23p64s1 (or) [Ar]4s1
1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p65s1 (or) [Kr]5s1
1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p64d105s25p66s1 (or) [Xe]6s1
[Rn]7s1
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 10 :
 83
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties
Nh
Mc
Ts
Og
Fig. 3.3 	
The types of elements in the Periodic Table based on the orbitals that  
are being filled. Also shown is the broad division of elements into METALS 
(                       ), NON-METALS (            ) and METALLOIDS (      ).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 11 :
 84
chemistry
reactive metals with low ionization enthalpies. 
They lose the outermost electron(s) readily to 
form 1+ ion (in the case of alkali metals) or 2+ 
ion (in the case of alkaline earth metals). The 
metallic character and the reactivity increase 
as we go down the group. Because of high 
reactivity they are never found pure in nature. 
The compounds of the s-block elements, with 
the exception of those of lithium and beryllium 
are predominantly ionic.
3.6.2	 The p-Block Elements
The p-Block Elements comprise those 
belonging to Group 13 to 18 and these 
together with the s-Block Elements are 
called the Representative Elements or Main 
Group Elements. The outermost electronic 
configuration varies from ns2np1 to ns2np6 
in each period. At the end of each period is 
a noble gas element with a closed valence 
shell ns2np6 configuration. All the orbitals 
in the valence shell of the noble gases are 
completely filled by electrons and it is very 
difficult to alter this stable arrangement by 
the addition or removal of electrons. The 
noble gases thus exhibit very low chemical 
reactivity. Preceding the noble gas family 
are two chemically important groups of non-
metals. They are the halogens (Group 17) and 
the chalcogens (Group 16). These two groups 
of elements have highly negative electron 
gain enthalpies and readily add one or two 
electrons respectively to attain the stable 
noble gas configuration. The non-metallic 
character increases as we move from left to 
right across a period and metallic character 
increases as we go down the group.
3.6.3	 The d-Block Elements (Transition  
	
Elements)
These are the elements of Group 3 to 12 in 
the centre of the Periodic Table. These are 
characterised by the filling of inner d orbitals 
by electrons and are therefore referred to as  
d-Block Elements. These elements have 
the general outer electronic configuration  
(n-1)d1-10ns0-2 except for Pd where its electronic 
configuration is 4d105s0.. They are all metals. 
They mostly form coloured ions, exhibit variable 
valence (oxidation states), paramagnetism and 
oftenly used as catalysts. However, Zn, Cd and 
Hg which have the electronic configuration, 
(n-1) d10ns2 do not show most of the properties 
of transition elements. In a way, transition 
metals form a bridge between the chemically 
active metals of s-block elements and the 
less active elements of Groups 13 and 14 and 
thus take their familiar name “Transition 
Elements”.
3.6.4	 The f-Block Elements  
	
(Inner-Transition Elements)
The two rows of elements at the bottom of 
the Periodic Table, called the Lanthanoids, 
Ce(Z = 58) – Lu(Z = 71) and Actinoids,  
Th(Z = 90) – Lr (Z = 103) are characterised by 
the outer electronic configuration (n-2)f1-14 
(n-1)d0–1ns2. The last electron added to each 
element is filled in f- orbital. These two series 
of elements are hence called the Inner-
Transition Elements (f-Block Elements). 
They are all metals. Within each series, the 
properties of the elements are quite similar. 
The chemistry of the early actinoids is 
more complicated than the corresponding 
lanthanoids, due to the large number of 
oxidation states possible for these actinoid 
elements. Actinoid elements are radioactive. 
Many of the actinoid elements have been made 
only in nanogram quantities or even less by 
nuclear reactions and their chemistry is not 
fully studied. The elements after uranium are 
called Transuranium Elements.
Problem 3.3
The elements  Z = 117 and 120 have not yet 
been discovered. In which family/group 
would you place these elements and 
also give the electronic configuration in 
each case.
Solution
We see from Fig. 3.2, that element 
with Z = 117, would belong to the 
halogen family (Group 17) and the 
electronic configuration would be [Rn] 
5f146d107s27p5. The element with Z = 120, 
will be placed in Group 2 (alkaline earth 
metals), and will have the electronic 
configuration [Uuo]8s2.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 12 :
 85
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties
3.6.5	 Metals, Non-metals and Metalloids
In addition to displaying the classification 
of elements into s-, p-, d-, and f-blocks, 
Fig. 3.3 shows another broad classification 
of elements based on their properties. The 
elements can be divided into Metals and 
Non-Metals. Metals comprise more than 
78% of all known elements and appear on 
the left side of the Periodic Table. Metals are 
usually solids at room temperature [mercury 
is an exception; gallium and caesium also 
have very low melting points (303K and 
302K, respectively)]. Metals usually have high 
melting and boiling points. They are good 
conductors of heat and electricity. They are 
malleable (can be flattened into thin sheets by 
hammering) and ductile (can be drawn into 
wires). In contrast, non-metals are located at 
the top right hand side of the Periodic Table. 
In fact, in a horizontal row, the property of 
elements change from metallic on the left to 
non-metallic on the right. Non-metals are 
usually solids or gases at room temperature 
with low melting and boiling points (boron 
and carbon are exceptions). They are poor 
conductors of heat and electricity. Most non-
metallic solids are brittle and are neither 
malleable nor ductile. The elements become 
more metallic as we go down a group; the 
non-metallic character increases as one goes 
from left to right across the Periodic Table. 
The change from metallic to non-metallic 
character is not abrupt as shown by the thick 
zig-zag line in Fig. 3.3. The elements (e.g., 
silicon, germanium, arsenic, antimony and 
tellurium) bordering this line and running 
diagonally across the Periodic Table show 
properties that are characteristic of both 
metals and non-metals. These elements are 
called Semi-metals or Metalloids.
Problem 3.4
Considering the atomic number and 
position in the periodic table, arrange 
the following elements in the increasing 
order of metallic character : Si, Be, Mg, 
Na, P.
Solution
Metallic character increases down a 
group and decreases along a period as 
we move from left to right. Hence the 
order of increasing metallic character 
is: P < Si < Be < Mg < Na.
3.7	
PERIODIC TRENDS IN PROPERTIES 
OF ELEMENTS
There are many observable patterns in the 
physical and chemical properties of elements 
as we descend in a group or move across a 
period in the Periodic Table. For example, 
within a period, chemical reactivity tends to 
be high in Group 1 metals, lower in elements 
towards the middle of the table, and increases 
to a maximum in the Group 17 non-metals. 
Likewise within a group of representative 
metals (say alkali metals) reactivity increases 
on moving down the group, whereas within a 
group of non-metals (say halogens), reactivity 
decreases down the group. But why do the 
properties of elements follow these trends? 
And how can we explain periodicity? To 
answer these questions, we must look into the 
theories of atomic structure and properties 
of the atom. In this section we shall discuss 
the periodic trends in certain physical and 
chemical properties and try to explain them 
in terms of number of electrons and energy 
levels.
3.7.1	 Trends in Physical Properties
There are numerous physical properties of 
elements such as melting and boiling points, 
heats of fusion and vaporization, energy 
of atomization, etc. which show periodic 
variations. However, we shall discuss the 
periodic trends with respect to atomic and 
ionic radii, ionization enthalpy, electron gain 
enthalpy and electronegativity.
(a) Atomic Radius
You can very well imagine that finding the 
size of an atom is a lot more complicated than 
measuring the radius of a ball. Do you know 
why? Firstly, because the size of an atom 
(~ 1.2 Å i.e., 1.2 × 10–10 m in radius) is very 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 13 :
 86
chemistry
small. Secondly, since the electron cloud 
surrounding the atom does not have a sharp 
boundary, the determination of the atomic 
size cannot be precise. In other words, there 
is no practical way by which the size of an 
individual atom can be measured. However, 
an estimate of the atomic size can be made by 
knowing the distance between the atoms in 
the combined state. One practical approach to 
estimate the size of an atom of a non-metallic 
element is to measure the distance between 
two atoms when they are bound together 
by a single bond in a covalent molecule and 
from this value, the “Covalent Radius” of the 
element can be calculated. For example, the 
bond distance in the chlorine molecule (Cl2) 
is 198 pm and half this distance (99 pm), is 
taken as the atomic radius of chlorine. For 
metals, we define the term “Metallic Radius” 
which is taken as half the internuclear 
distance separating the metal cores in the 
metallic crystal. For example, the distance 
between two adjacent copper atoms in solid 
copper is 256 pm; hence the metallic radius 
of copper is assigned a value of 128 pm. For 
simplicity, in this book, we use the term 
Atomic Radius to refer to both covalent or 
metallic radius depending on whether the 
element is a non-metal or a metal. Atomic 
radii can be measured by X-ray or other 
spectroscopic methods. 
The atomic radii of a few elements are listed 
in Table 3.6. Two trends are obvious. We can 
explain these trends in terms of nuclear charge 
and energy level. The atomic size generally 
decreases across a period as illustrated in  
Fig. 3.4(a) for the elements of the second 
period. It is because within the period the 
outer electrons are in the same valence shell 
and the effective nuclear charge increases 
as the atomic number increases resulting in 
the increased attraction of electrons to the 
nucleus. Within a family or vertical column 
of the periodic table, the atomic radius 
increases regularly with atomic number as 
illustrated in Fig. 3.4(b). For alkali metals 
and halogens, as we descend the groups, 
the principal quantum number (n) increases 
and the valence electrons are farther from 
the nucleus. This happens because the inner 
energy levels are filled with electrons, which 
serve to shield the outer electrons from the 
pull of the nucleus. Consequently the size of 
the atom increases as reflected in the atomic 
radii.
Note that the atomic radii of noble gases 
are not considered here. Being monoatomic, 
their (non-bonded radii) values are very 
large. In fact radii of noble gases should be 
compared not with the covalent radii but with 
the van der Waals radii of other elements.
Table 3.6(a)  Atomic Radii/pm Across the Periods
Atom (Period II)
Li
Be
B
C
N
O
F
Atomic radius
152
111
88
77
74
66
64
Atom (Period III)
Na
Mg
Al
Si
P
S
Cl
Atomic radius
186
160
143
117
110
104
99
 Table 3.6(b)  Atomic Radii/pm Down a Family
Atom  
(Group I)
Atomic  
Radius
Atom  
(Group 17)
Atomic  
Radius
Li
152
F
64
Na
186
Cl
99
K
231
Br
114
Rb
244
I
133
Cs
262
At
140
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 14 :
 87
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties
(b) Ionic Radius
The removal of an electron from an atom 
results in the formation of a cation, whereas 
gain of an electron leads to an anion. The 
ionic radii can be estimated by measuring 
the distances between cations and anions 
in ionic crystals. In general, the ionic radii 
of elements exhibit the same trend as the 
atomic radii. A cation is smaller than its 
parent atom because it has fewer electrons 
while its nuclear charge remains the same. 
The size of an anion will be larger than that of 
the parent atom because the addition of one 
or more electrons would result in increased 
repulsion among the electrons and a decrease 
in effective nuclear charge. For example, the 
ionic radius of fluoride ion (F–) is 136 pm 
whereas the atomic radius of fluorine is only 
64 pm. On the other hand, the atomic radius 
of sodium is 186 pm compared to the ionic 
radius of 95 pm for Na+.
When we find some atoms and ions which 
contain the same number of electrons, we call 
them isoelectronic species*. For example, 
O2–, F–, Na+ and Mg2+ have the same number 
of electrons (10). Their radii would be different 
because of their different nuclear charges. The 
Fig. 3.4 (a)		Variation of atomic radius with atomic 
number across the second period
Fig. 3.4 (b)	Variation of atomic radius with 
atomic number for alkali metals and 
halogens
cation with the greater positive charge will 
have a smaller radius because of the greater 
attraction of the electrons to the nucleus. 
Anion with the greater negative charge will 
have the larger radius. In this case, the net 
repulsion of the electrons will outweigh the 
nuclear charge and the ion will expand in size.
Problem 3.5
Which of the following species will have 
the largest and the smallest size?
Mg, Mg2+, Al, Al3+.
Solution
Atomic radii decrease across a period. 
Cations are smaller than their parent 
atoms. Among isoelectronic species, 
the one with the larger positive nuclear 
charge will have a smaller radius.
Hence the largest species is Mg; the 
smallest one is Al3+.
(c) Ionization Enthalpy
A quantitative measure of the tendency of 
an element to lose electron is given by its 
Ionization Enthalpy. It represents the 
energy required to remove an electron from an 
isolated gaseous atom (X) in its ground state. 
* 	 Two or more species with same number of atoms, same number of valence electrons and same structure, regardless of the 
nature of elements involved.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 15 :
 88
chemistry
In other words, the first ionization enthalpy 
for an element X is the enthalpy change  
(∆i H) for the reaction depicted in equation 3.1.
X(g) → X+(g) + e–	
	
	
        (3.1)
The ionization enthalpy is expressed in 
units of kJ mol–1. We can define the second 
ionization enthalpy as the energy required 
to remove the second most loosely bound 
electron; it is the energy required to carry out 
the reaction shown in equation 3.2.
X+(g) → X2+(g) + e–	
	
	
        (3.2)
Energy is always required to remove 
electrons from an atom and hence ionization 
enthalpies are always positive. The second 
ionization enthalpy will be higher than the 
first ionization enthalpy because it is more 
difficult to remove an electron from a positively 
charged ion than from a neutral atom. In the 
same way the third ionization enthalpy will be 
higher than the second and so on. The term 
“ionization enthalpy”, if not qualified, is taken 
as the first ionization enthalpy.
The first ionization enthalpies of elements 
having atomic numbers up to 60 are plotted 
in Fig. 3.5. The periodicity of the graph is 
quite striking. You will find maxima at the 
noble gases which have closed electron shells 
and very stable electron configurations. On 
the other hand, minima occur at the alkali 
metals and their low ionization enthalpies 
Fig. 3.5 	
Variation of first ionization enthalpies 
(∆iH) with atomic number for elements 
with Z = 1 to 60
can be correlated with their high reactivity. 
In addition, you will notice two trends the 
first ionization enthalpy generally increases 
as we go across a period and decreases 
as we descend in a group. These trends 
are illustrated in Figs. 3.6(a) and 3.6(b) 
respectively for the elements of the second 
period and the first group of the periodic 
table. You will appreciate that the ionization 
enthalpy and atomic radius are closely related 
properties. To understand these trends, we 
have to consider two factors : (i) the attraction 
of electrons towards the nucleus, and (ii) the 
repulsion of electrons from each other. The 
effective nuclear charge experienced by a 
Fig. 3.6(a)	First ionization enthalpies (∆iH) of elements of the second period as a  
function of atomic number (Z) and Fig. 3.6(b) ∆iH of alkali metals as a function of Z. 
3.6 (a)
3.6 (b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 16 :
 89
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties
valence electron in an atom will be less than 
the actual charge on the nucleus because of 
“shielding” or “screening” of the valence 
electron from the nucleus by the intervening 
core electrons. For example, the 2s electron 
in lithium is shielded from the nucleus by 
the inner core of 1s electrons. As a result, the 
valence electron experiences a net positive 
charge which is  less than the actual charge 
of +3. In general, shielding is effective when 
the orbitals in the inner shells are completely 
filled. This situation occurs in the case of 
alkali metals which have single outermost 
ns-electron preceded by a noble gas electronic 
configuration.
When we move from lithium to fluorine 
across the second period, successive electrons 
are added to orbitals in the same principal 
quantum level and the shielding of the nuclear 
charge by the inner core of electrons does 
not increase very much to compensate for 
the increased attraction of the electron to the 
nucleus. Thus, across a period, increasing 
nuclear charge outweighs the shielding. 
Consequently, the outermost electrons are 
held more and more tightly and the ionization 
enthalpy increases across a period. As we go 
down a group, the outermost electron being 
increasingly farther from the nucleus, there is 
an increased shielding of the nuclear charge 
by the electrons in the inner levels. In this 
case, increase in shielding outweighs the 
increasing nuclear charge and the removal of 
the outermost electron requires less energy 
down a group.
From Fig. 3.6(a), you will also notice that 
the first ionization enthalpy of boron (Z = 5) 
is slightly less than that of beryllium (Z = 4) 
even though the former has a greater nuclear 
charge. When we consider the same principal 
quantum level, an s-electron is attracted to the 
nucleus more than a p-electron. In beryllium, 
the electron removed during the ionization is 
an s-electron whereas the electron removed 
during ionization of boron is a p-electron. The 
penetration of a 2s-electron to the nucleus is 
more than that of a 2p-electron; hence the 2p 
electron of boron is more shielded from the 
nucleus by the inner core of electrons than 
the 2s electrons of beryllium. Therefore, it is 
easier to remove the 2p-electron from boron 
compared to the removal of a 2s- electron from 
beryllium. Thus, boron has a smaller first 
ionization enthalpy than beryllium. Another 
“anomaly” is the smaller first ionization 
enthalpy of oxygen compared to nitrogen. This 
arises because in the nitrogen atom, three 
2p-electrons reside in different atomic orbitals 
(Hund’s rule) whereas in the oxygen atom, 
two of the four 2p-electrons must occupy the 
same 2p-orbital resulting in an increased 
electron-electron repulsion. Consequently, 
it is easier to remove the fourth 2p-electron 
from oxygen than it is, to remove one of the 
three 2p-electrons from nitrogen.
Problem 3.6	
The first ionization enthalpy (∆i H ) values 
of the third period elements, Na, Mg and 
Si are respectively 496, 737 and 786 kJ  
mol–1. Predict whether the first ∆i H value 
for Al will be more close to 575 or 760 kJ  
mol–1 ? Justify your answer.
Solution 
It will be more close to 575 kJ mol–1. 
The value for Al should be lower than 
that of Mg because of effective shielding 
of 3p electrons from the nucleus by  
3s-electrons.
(d) Electron Gain Enthalpy 
When an electron is added to a neutral 
gaseous atom (X) to convert it into a negative 
ion, the enthalpy change accompanying the 
process is defined as the Electron Gain 
Enthalpy (∆egH). Electron gain enthalpy 
provides a measure of the ease with which 
an atom adds an electron to form anion as 
represented by equation 3.3.
X(g) + e–  →  X –(g)	
	
	
         (3.3)
Depending on the element, the process 
of adding an electron to the atom can be 
either endothermic or exothermic. For many 
elements energy is released when an electron 
is added to the atom and the electron gain 
enthalpy is negative. For example, group 
17 elements (the halogens) have very high 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 17 :
 90
chemistry
negative electron gain enthalpies because 
they can attain stable noble gas electronic 
configurations by picking up an electron. 
On the other hand, noble gases have large 
positive electron gain enthalpies because the 
electron has to enter the next higher principal 
quantum level leading to a very unstable 
electronic configuration. It may be noted that 
electron gain enthalpies have large negative 
values toward the upper right of the periodic 
table preceding the noble gases.
The variation in electron gain enthalpies of 
elements is less systematic than for ionization 
enthalpies. As a general rule, electron gain 
enthalpy becomes more negative with increase 
in the atomic number across a period. The 
effective nuclear charge increases from left to 
right across a period and consequently it will 
be easier to add an electron to a smaller atom 
since the added electron on an average would 
be closer to the positively charged nucleus. We 
should also expect electron gain enthalpy to 
become less negative as we go down a group 
because the size of the atom increases and 
the added electron would be farther from the 
nucleus. This is generally the case (Table 
3.7). However, electron gain enthalpy of O or 
F is less negative than that of the succeeding 
element. This is because when an electron is 
added to O or F, the added electron goes to 
the smaller n = 2 quantum level and suffers 
significant repulsion from the other electrons 
present in this level. For the n = 3 quantum 
level (S or Cl), the added electron occupies 
a larger region of space and the electron-
electron repulsion is much less.
Problem 3.7
Which of the following will have the most 
negative electron gain enthalpy and 
which the least negative?
P, S, Cl, F.
Explain your answer.
Solution
Electron gain enthalpy generally 
becomes more negative across a 
period as we move from left to right. 
Within a group, electron gain enthalpy 
becomes less negative down a group. 
However, adding an electron to the 
2p-orbital leads to greater repulsion 
than adding an electron to the larger  
3p-orbital. Hence the element with 
most negative electron gain enthalpy is 
chlorine; the one with the least negative 
electron gain enthalpy is phosphorus.
(e) Electronegativity
A qualitative measure of the ability of an atom 
in a chemical compound to attract shared 
electrons to itself is called electronegativity. 
Unlike ionization enthalpy and electron gain 
enthalpy, it is not a measureable quantity. 
However, a number of numerical scales of 
electronegativity of elements viz., Pauling 
scale, Mulliken-Jaffe scale, Allred-Rochow 
scale have been developed. The one which 
is the most widely used is the Pauling scale. 
Linus Pauling, an American scientist, in 1922 
assigned arbitrarily a value of 4.0 to fluorine, 
the element considered to have the greatest 
*	 In many books, the negative of the enthalpy change for the process depicted in equation 3.3 is defined as the ELECTRON 
AFFINITY (Ae ) of the atom under consideration. If energy is released when an electron is added to an atom, the electron 
affinity is taken as positive, contrary to thermodynamic convention. If energy has to be supplied to add an electron to an 
atom, then the electron affinity of the atom is assigned a negative sign. However, electron affinity is defined as absolute 
zero and, therefore at any other temperature (T) heat capacities of the reactants and the products have to be taken into 
account in ∆egH = –Ae – 5/2 RT. 
Table 3.7  Electron Gain Enthalpies* / (kJ mol–1) of Some Main Group Elements
Group 1
∆egH
Group 16
∆egH
Group 17
∆egH
Group 0
∆egH
H
– 73
He
+ 48
Li
– 60
O
– 141
F
– 328
Ne
+ 116
Na
– 53
S
– 200
Cl
– 349
Ar
+  96
K
– 48
Se
– 195
Br
– 325 
Kr
+ 96
Rb
– 47 
Te
– 190
I
– 295
Xe
+ 77
Cs
– 46
Po
– 174
At
– 270
Rn
+ 68
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 18 :
 91
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties
ability to attract electrons. Approximate 
values for the electronegativity of a few 
elements are given in Table 3.8(a)
The electronegativity of any given element 
is not constant; it varies depending on the 
element to which it is bound. Though it is 
not a measurable quantity, it does provide a 
means of predicting the nature of force that 
holds a pair of atoms together – a relationship 
that you will explore later.
Electronegativity generally 
increases across a period from 
left to right (say from lithium to 
fluorine) and decrease down a group 
(say from fluorine to astatine) 
in the periodic table. How can 
these trends be explained? 
Can the electronegativity be 
related to atomic radii, which 
tend to decrease across each 
period from left to right, but 
increase down each group ? The 
attraction between the outer 
(or valence) electrons and the 
nucleus increases as the atomic 
radius decreases in a period. The 
electronegativity also increases. 
On the same account electronegativity values 
decrease with the increase in atomic radii 
down a group. The trend is similar to that of 
ionization enthalpy.
Knowing the relationship between 
electronegativity and atomic radius, can 
you now visualise the relationship between 
electronegativity and non-metallic properties? 
Non-metallic  elements have strong tendency 
Fig. 3.7  The periodic trends of elements in the periodic table
Table 3.8(a)  Electronegativity Values (on Pauling scale) Across the Periods
Atom (Period II)
Li
Be
B
C
N
O
F
Electronegativity
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Atom (Period III)
Na
Mg
Al
Si
P
S
Cl
Electronegativity
0.9
1.2
1.5
1.8
2.1
2.5
3.0
Table 3.8(b)  Electronegativity Values (on Pauling scale) Down a Family
Atom  
(Group I)
Electronegativity 
Value
Atom  
(Group 17)
Electronegativity 
Value
Li
1.0
F
4.0
Na
0.9
Cl
3.0
K
0.8
Br
2.8
Rb
0.8
I
2.5
Cs
0.7
At
2.2
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 19 :
 92
chemistry
to gain electrons. Therefore, electronegativity is 
directly related to that non-metallic properties 
of elements. It can be further extended to say 
that the electronegativity is inversely related 
to the metallic properties of elements. Thus, 
the increase in electronegativities across 
a period is accompanied by an increase 
in non-metallic properties (or decrease in 
metallic properties) of elements. Similarly, the 
decrease in electronegativity down a group is 
accompanied by a decrease in non-metallic 
properties (or increase in metallic properties) 
of elements.
All these periodic trends are summarised 
in Figure 3.7.
3.7.2	 Periodic Trends in Chemical 	
	
	
Properties
Most of the trends in chemical properties of 
elements, such as diagonal relationships, inert 
pair effect, effects of lanthanoid contraction 
etc. will be dealt with along the discussion 
of each group in later units. In this section 
we shall study the periodicity of the valence 
state shown by elements and the anomalous 
properties of the second period elements (from 
lithium to fluorine).
(a) Periodicity of Valence or Oxidation  
     States
The valence is the most characteristic property 
of the elements and can be understood in 
terms of their electronic configurations.  The 
valence of representative elements is usually 
(though not necessarily) equal to the number 
of electrons in the outermost orbitals and/or 
equal to eight minus the number of outermost 
electrons as shown below. 
Nowadays the term oxidation state is 
frequently used for valence. Consider the 
two oxygen containing compounds: OF2 and 
Na2O. The order of electronegativity of the 
three elements involved in these compounds 
is F > O > Na. Each of the atoms of fluorine, 
with outer electronic configuration 2s22p5, 
shares one electron with oxygen in the OF2 
molecule. Being highest electronegative 
element, fluorine is given oxidation state 
–1. Since there are two fluorine atoms in 
this molecule, oxygen with outer electronic 
configuration 2s22p4 shares two electrons 
with fluorine atoms and thereby exhibits 
oxidation state +2. In Na2O, oxygen being 
more electronegative accepts two electrons, 
one from each of the two sodium atoms and, 
thus, shows oxidation state –2. On the other 
hand sodium with electronic configuration 
3s1 loses one electron to oxygen and is given 
oxidation state +1. Thus, the oxidation state 
of an element in a particular compound can 
be defined as the charge acquired by its atom 
on the basis of electronegative consideration 
from other atoms in the molecule.
Problem 3.8
Using the Periodic Table, predict the 
formulas of compounds which might 
be formed by the following pairs of 
elements; (a) silicon and bromine  
(b) aluminium and sulphur.
Solution
(a)	 Silicon is group 14 element with 
a valence of 4; bromine belongs to 
the halogen family with a valence 
of 1. Hence the formula of the 
compound formed would be SiBr4.
(b)	 Aluminium 
belongs 
to 
group 
13 with a valence of 3; sulphur 
belongs to group 16 elements with 
a valence of 2. Hence, the formula 
of the compound formed would be 
Al2S3.
Some periodic trends observed in the 
valence of elements (hydrides and oxides) 
are shown in Table 3.9. Other such periodic 
trends which occur in the chemical behaviour 
of the elements are discussed elsewhere in 
Group
1
2
13
14
15
16
17
18
Number of valence 
electron
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
alence
1
2
3
4
3,5
2,6
1,7
0,8
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 20 :
 93
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties
this book. There are many elements which 
exhibit variable valence. This is particularly 
characteristic of transition elements and 
actinoids, which we shall study later.
(b) Anomalous Properties of Second  
      Period Elements
The first element of each of the groups 1 
(lithium) and 2 (beryllium) and groups 13-17 
(boron to fluorine) differs in many respects 
from the other members of their respective 
group. For example, lithium unlike other 
alkali metals, and beryllium unlike other 
alkaline earth metals, form compounds with 
pronounced covalent character; the other 
members of these groups predominantly 
form ionic compounds. In fact the behaviour 
of lithium and beryllium is more similar with 
Table 3.9	
Periodic Trends in Valence of Elements as shown by the Formulas of Their 
Compounds
Group
1
2
13
14
15
16
17
Formula of 
hydride
LiH
NaH
KH
CaH2
B2H6
AlH3
CH4
SiH4
GeH4
SnH4
NH3
PH3
AsH3
H2O
H2S
H2Se
H2Te
HF
HCl
HBr
HI
Formula
of oxide
Li2O
Na2O
K2O
MgO
CaO	
SrO
BaO
B2O3
Al2O3
Ga2O3
In2O3
CO2
SiO2
GeO2
SnO2
PbO2
N2O3, N2O5
P4O6, P4O10
As2O3, As2O5
Sb2O3, Sb2O5
Bi2O3     –
SO3
SeO3
TeO3
–
–
Cl2 O7
–
–
Property
Element
Metallic radius M/pm
Li
152
Na
186
Be
111
Mg
160
B
88
Al
143
Ionic radius M+/pm
Li
76
Na
102
Be
31
Mg
72
the second element of the following group 
i.e., magnesium and aluminium, respectively. 
This sort of similarity is commonly referred 
to as diagonal relationship in the periodic 
properties. 
What are the reasons for the different 
chemical behaviour of the first member of 
a group of elements in the s- and p-blocks 
compared to that of the subsequent members 
in the same group? The anomalous behaviour 
is attributed to their small size, large charge/
radius ratio and high electronegativity of the 
elements.  In addition, the first member of 
group has only four valence orbitals (2s and 
2p) available for bonding, whereas the second 
member of the groups have nine valence 
orbitals (3s, 3p, 3d). As a consequence of 
this, the maximum covalency of the first 
member of each group is 4 (e.g., boron 
can only form BF4


, whereas the other 
members of the groups can expand their 
valence shell to accommodate more than 
four pairs of electrons e.g., aluminium 
AlF6
3


 forms). Furthermore, the first 
member of p-block elements displays 
greater ability to form pπ – pπ  multiple 
bonds to itself (e.g., C = C, C ≡ C, 
N = N, N ≡ Ν) and to other second period 
elements (e.g., C = O, C = N, C ≡ N, 
N = O) compared to subsequent members 
of the same group.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 21 :
 94
chemistry
Problem 3.9
Are the oxidation state and covalency of 
Al in [AlCl(H2O)5]2+ same ?
Solution
No. The oxidation state of Al is +3 and 
the covalency is 6.
3.7.3	 Periodic 
Trends 
and 
Chemical  
	
Reactivity
We have observed the periodic trends in 
certain fundamental properties such as 
atomic and ionic radii, ionization enthalpy, 
electron gain enthalpy and valence. We 
know by now that the periodicity is related to 
electronic configuration. That is, all chemical 
and physical properties are a manifestation of 
the electronic configuration of elements. We 
shall now try to explore relationships between 
these fundamental properties of elements with 
their chemical reactivity.
The atomic and ionic radii, as we know, 
generally decrease in a period from left to right. 
As a consequence, the ionization enthalpies 
generally increase (with some exceptions as 
outlined in section 3.7.1(a)) and electron gain 
enthalpies become more negative across a 
period. In other words, the ionization enthalpy 
of the extreme left element in a period is the 
least and the electron gain enthalpy of the 
element on the extreme right is the highest 
negative (note : noble gases having completely 
filled shells have rather positive electron 
gain enthalpy values). This results into high 
chemical reactivity at the two extremes and 
the lowest in the centre. Thus, the maximum 
chemical reactivity at the extreme left (among 
alkali metals) is exhibited by the loss of an 
electron leading to the formation of a cation 
and at the extreme right (among halogens) 
shown by the gain of an electron forming 
an anion. This property can be related with 
the reducing and oxidizing behaviour of the 
elements which you will learn later. However, 
here it can be directly related to the metallic 
and non-metallic character of elements. Thus, 
the metallic character of an element, which 
is highest at the extremely left decreases and 
the non-metallic character increases while 
moving from left to right across the period. 
The chemical reactivity of an element can be 
best shown by its reactions with oxygen and 
halogens. Here, we shall consider the reaction 
of the elements with oxygen only. Elements 
on two extremes of a period easily combine 
with oxygen to form oxides. The normal oxide 
formed by the element on extreme left is the 
most basic (e.g., Na2O), whereas that formed 
by the element on extreme right is the most 
acidic (e.g., Cl2O7). Oxides of elements in the 
centre are amphoteric (e.g., Al2O3, As2O3) or 
neutral (e.g., CO, NO, N2O). Amphoteric oxides 
behave as acidic with bases and as basic with 
acids, whereas neutral oxides have no acidic 
or basic properties.
Problem 3.10
Show by a chemical reaction with water 
that Na2O is a basic oxide and Cl2O7 is 
an acidic oxide.
Solution
Na2O with water forms a strong base 
whereas Cl2O7 forms strong acid.
Na2O + H2O → 2NaOH
Cl2O7 + H2O → 2HClO4
Their basic or acidic nature can be 
qualitatively tested with litmus paper.
Among transition metals (3d series), the 
change in atomic radii is much smaller as 
compared to those of representative elements 
across the period. The change in atomic radii 
is still smaller among inner-transition metals  
(4f series). The ionization enthalpies are 
intermediate between those of s- and p-blocks. 
As a consequence, they are less electropositive 
than group 1 and 2 metals.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 22 :
 95
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties
In a group, the increase in atomic and 
ionic radii with increase in atomic number 
generally results in a gradual decrease in 
ionization enthalpies and a regular decrease 
(with exception in some third period elements 
as shown in section 3.7.1(d)) in electron 
gain enthalpies in the case of main group 
elements. Thus, the metallic character 
increases down the group and non-metallic 
character decreases. This trend can be related 
with their reducing and oxidizing property 
which you will learn later. In the case of 
transition elements, however, a reverse trend 
is observed. This can be explained in terms of 
atomic size and ionization enthalpy.
SUMMARY
In this Unit, you have studied the development of the Periodic Law and the Periodic Table. 
Mendeleev’s Periodic Table was based on atomic masses. Modern Periodic Table arranges 
the elements in the order of their atomic numbers in seven horizontal rows (periods) and 
eighteen vertical columns (groups or families). Atomic numbers in a period are consecutive, 
whereas in a group they increase in a pattern. Elements of the same group have similar 
valence shell electronic configuration and, therefore, exhibit similar chemical properties. 
However, the elements of the same period have incrementally increasing number of electrons 
from left to right, and, therefore, have different valencies. Four types of elements can be 
recognized in the periodic table on the basis of their electronic configurations. These are 
s-block, p-block, d-block and f-block elements. Hydrogen with one electron in the 1s orbital 
occupies a unique position in the periodic table. Metals comprise more than seventy eight 
per cent of the known elements. Non-metals, which are located at the top of the periodic 
table, are less than twenty in number. Elements which lie at the border line between metals 
and non-metals (e.g., Si, Ge, As) are called metalloids or semi-metals. Metallic character 
increases with increasing atomic number in a group whereas decreases from left to right 
in a period. The physical and chemical properties of elements vary periodically with their 
atomic numbers.
 Periodic trends are observed in atomic sizes, ionization enthalpies, electron gain 
enthalpies, electronegativity and valence. The atomic radii decrease while going from 
left to right in a period and increase with atomic number in a group. Ionization enthalpies 
generally increase across a period and decrease down a group. Electronegativity also shows 
a similar trend. Electron gain enthalpies, in general, become more negative across a period 
and less negative down a group. There is some periodicity in valence, for example, among 
representative elements, the valence is either equal to the number of electrons in the 
outermost orbitals or eight minus this number. Chemical reactivity is highest at the two 
extremes of a period and is lowest in the centre. The reactivity on the left extreme of a period 
is because of the ease of electron loss (or low ionization enthalpy). Highly reactive elements 
do not occur in nature in free state; they usually occur in the combined form. Oxides formed 
of the elements on the left are basic and of the elements on the right are acidic in nature. 
Oxides of elements in the centre are amphoteric or neutral.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 23 :
 96
chemistry
Exercises
3.1	
What is the basic theme of organisation in the periodic table?
3.2	
Which important property did Mendeleev use to classify the elements in his periodic 
table and did he stick to that?
3.3	
What is the basic difference in approach between the Mendeleev’s Periodic Law and 
the Modern Periodic Law?
3.4	
On the basis of quantum numbers, justify that the sixth period of the periodic table 
should have 32 elements.
3.5	
In terms of period and group where would you locate the element with Z =114?
3.6	
Write the atomic number of the element present in the third period and seventeenth 
group of the periodic table.
3.7	
Which element do you think would have been named by
	
(i)	
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
	
(ii)	 Seaborg’s group?
3.8	
Why do elements in the same group have similar physical and chemical properties?
3.9	
What does atomic radius and ionic radius really mean to you?
3.10	
How do atomic radius vary in a period and in a group? How do you explain the 
variation?
3.11	
What do you understand by isoelectronic species? Name a species that will be 
isoelectronic with each of the following atoms or ions.
 
(i) F–	
(ii) Ar	
	
(iii) Mg2+	
(iv) Rb+
3.12 
Consider the following species :
	
N3–, O2–, F–, Na+, Mg2+ and Al3+
	
(a)	 What is common in them?
	
(b)	 Arrange them in the order of increasing ionic radii.
3.13	
Explain why cation are smaller and anions larger in radii than their parent atoms?
3.14 
What is the significance of the terms — ‘isolated gaseous atom’ and ‘ground state’ 
while defining the ionization enthalpy and electron gain enthalpy?
	
Hint : Requirements for comparison purposes.
3.15	
Energy of an electron in the ground state of the hydrogen atom is 
 –2.18×10–18J. Calculate the ionization enthalpy of atomic hydrogen in terms of  
J mol–1.
	
Hint: Apply the idea of mole concept to derive the answer.
3.16	
Among the second period elements the actual ionization enthalpies are in the order 
Li < B < Be < C < O < N < F < Ne.
	
Explain why
	
(i)	
Be has higher ∆i H than B
	
(ii)	 O has lower ∆i H than N and F?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 24 :
 97
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties
3.17 
How would you explain the fact that the first ionization enthalpy of sodium is lower 
than that of magnesium but its second ionization enthalpy is higher than that of 
magnesium?
3.18	
What are the various factors due to which the ionization enthalpy of the main group 
elements tends to decrease down a group?
3.19 
The first ionization enthalpy values (in kJ mol–1) of group 13 elements are :
	
B	
	
Al	
Ga	
In	
Tl
	
801		
577	
579	
558	
589
	
How would you explain this deviation from the general trend ?
3.20	
Which of the following pairs of elements would have a more negative electron gain 
enthalpy?
 
(i) O or F 
(ii) F or Cl
3.21	
Would you expect the second electron gain enthalpy of O as positive, more negative 
or less negative than the first? Justify your answer.
3.22	
What is the basic difference between the terms electron gain enthalpy and 
electronegativity?
3.23	
How would you react to the statement that the electronegativity of N on Pauling 
scale is 3.0 in all the nitrogen compounds?
3.24	
Describe the theory associated with the radius of an atom as it
	
(a)	 gains an electron
	
(b)	 loses an electron
3.25 
Would you expect the first ionization enthalpies for two isotopes of the same element 
to be the same or different? Justify your answer.
3.26	
What are the major differences between metals and non-metals?
3.27	
Use the periodic table to answer the following questions.
 
(a) Identify an element with five electrons in the outer subshell.
	
(b)	 Identify an element that would tend to lose two electrons.
	
(c)	 Identify an element that would tend to gain two electrons.
	
(d)	 Identify the group having metal, non-metal, liquid as well as gas at the room  
	
temperature.
3.28	
The increasing order of reactivity among group 1 elements is Li < Na < K < Rb <Cs 
whereas that among group 17 elements is F > CI > Br > I. Explain.
3.29 
Write the general outer electronic configuration of s-, p-, d- and f- block elements.
3.30	
Assign the position of the element having outer electronic configuration  
(i) ns2np4 for n=3 (ii) (n-1)d2ns2 for n=4, and (iii) (n-2) f 7 (n-1)d1ns2 for n=6, in the 
periodic table.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 25 :
 98
chemistry
3.31 
The first (∆iH1) and the second (∆iH2) ionization enthalpies (in kJ mol–1) and the (∆egH) 
electron gain enthalpy  (in kJ mol–1) of a few elements are given below:
	
Elements	
∆H1	
     ∆H2	 	
∆egH
	
I	
	
520	
     7300		
–60
	
II	
	
419	
     3051		
–48
	
III	 	
1681	
     3374		
–328
	
IV	 	
1008	
     1846		
–295
	
V	
	
2372	
     5251		
+48
	
VI	 	
738	
     1451		
–40
 
Which of the above elements is likely to be :
	
(a)	 the least reactive element.
	
(b)	 the most reactive metal.
	
(c)	 the most reactive non-metal.
	
(d)	 the least reactive non-metal. 
	
(e)	 the metal which can form a stable binary halide of the formula MX2(X=halogen).
	
(f)	
the metal which can form a predominantly stable covalent halide of the formula  
	
MX (X=halogen)?
3.32	
Predict the formulas of the stable binary compounds that would be formed by the 
combination of the following pairs of elements.
	
(a)	 Lithium and oxygen	
(b)	 Magnesium and nitrogen
	
(c)	 Aluminium and iodine	
(d)	 Silicon and oxygen
 
(e) Phosphorus and fluorine (f) Element 71 and fluorine
3.33 
In the modern periodic table, the period indicates the value of :
	
(a)	 atomic number
	
(b)	 atomic mass
	
(c)	 principal quantum number
	
(d)	 azimuthal quantum number.
3.34	
Which of the following statements related to the modern periodic table is incorrect?
	
(a)	 The p-block has 6 columns, because a maximum of 6 electrons can occupy all  
	
the orbitals in a p-shell.
	
(b)	 The d-block has 8 columns, because a maximum of 8 electrons can occupy all  
	
the orbitals in a d-subshell.
	
(c)	 Each block contains a number of columns equal to the number of electrons that  
	
can occupy that subshell.
	
(d)	 The block indicates value of azimuthal quantum number (l) for the last subshell  
 
that received electrons in building up the electronic configuration.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 26 :
 99
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties
3.35 
Anything that influences the valence electrons will affect the chemistry of the 
element. Which one of the following factors does not affect the valence shell?
	
(a)	 Valence principal quantum number (n)
	
(b)	 Nuclear charge (Z )
	
(c)	 Nuclear mass
	
(d)	 Number of core electrons.
3.36 
The size of isoelectronic species — F–, Ne and Na+ is affected by
	
(a)	 nuclear charge (Z )
	
(b)	 valence principal quantum number (n)
	
(c)	 electron-electron interaction in the outer orbitals
	
(d)	 none of the factors because their size is the same.
3.37	
Which one of the following statements is incorrect in relation to ionization enthalpy?
	
(a)	 Ionization enthalpy increases for each successive electron.
	
(b)	 The greatest increase in ionization enthalpy is experienced on removal of electron  
 
from core noble gas configuration.
	
(c)	 End of valence electrons is marked by a big jump in ionization enthalpy.
	
(d)	 Removal of electron from orbitals bearing lower n value is easier than from  
	
orbital having higher n value.
3.38	
Considering the elements B, Al, Mg, and K, the correct order of their metallic 
character is :
	
(a) B > Al > Mg > K	
	
(b)  Al > Mg > B > K
	
(c) Mg > Al > K > B	
	
(d)  K > Mg > Al > B
3.39 
Considering the elements B, C, N, F, and Si, the correct order of their non-metallic 
character is :
 
(a) B > C > Si > N > F  
(b)  Si > C > B > N > F
 
(c) F > N > C > B > Si  
(d)  F > N > C > Si > B
3.40 
Considering the elements F, Cl, O and N, the correct order of their chemical reactivity 
in terms of oxidizing property is :
 
(a) F > Cl > O > N 
 
(b)  F > O > Cl > N
 
(c) Cl > F > O > N 
 
(d)  O > F > N > Cl
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 1 :
 Scientists are constantly discovering new compounds, 
orderly arranging the facts about them, trying to explain 
with the existing knowledge, organising to modify the 
earlier views or evolve theories for explaining the newly 
observed facts.
Unit 4
After studying this Unit, you will be 
able to 
• 
understand  Kössel-Lewis 
approach to chemical bonding; 
• 
explain the octet rule and its 
limitations, draw Lewis structures 
of simple molecules;
• 
explain the formation of different 
types of bonds;
• 
describe the VSEPR theory and 
predict the geometry of simple 
molecules;
• 
explain the valence bond 
approach for the formation of 
covalent bonds;
• 
predict the directional properties 
of covalent bonds;
• 
explain the different types of 
hybridisation  involving s, p and 
d orbitals and draw shapes of 
simple covalent molecules;
• 
describe the molecular orbital 
theory of homonuclear diatomic 
molecules;
• 
explain the concept of hydrogen 
bond.
CHEMICAL BONDING AND 
MOLECULAR STRUCTURE
Matter is made up of one or different type of elements. 
Under normal conditions no other element exists as an 
independent atom in nature, except noble gases. However, 
a group of atoms is found to exist together as one species 
having characteristic properties. Such a group of atoms 
is called a molecule. Obviously there must be some force 
which holds these constituent atoms together in the 
molecules. The attractive force which holds various 
constituents (atoms, ions, etc.) together in different 
chemical species is called a chemical bond. Since the 
formation of chemical compounds takes place as a result of 
combination of atoms of various elements in different ways, 
it raises many questions. Why do atoms combine? Why are 
only certain combinations possible? Why do some atoms 
combine while certain others do not? Why do molecules 
possess definite shapes? To answer such questions different 
theories and concepts have been put forward from time 
to time. These are Kössel-Lewis approach, Valence Shell 
Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) Theory, Valence Bond (VB) 
Theory and Molecular Orbital (MO) Theory. The evolution 
of various theories of valence and the interpretation of 
the nature of chemical bonds have closely been related to 
the developments in the understanding of the structure 
of atom, the electronic configuration of elements and the 
periodic table. Every system tends to be more stable and 
bonding is nature’s way of lowering the energy of the system 
to attain stability.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 2 :
 101
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
4.1	
KÖssel-Lewis Approach to 
Chemical Bonding  
In order to explain the formation of chemical 
bond in terms of electrons, a number of 
attempts were made, but it was only in 
1916 when Kössel and Lewis succeeded 
independently in giving a satisfactory 
explanation. They were the first to provide 
some logical explanation of valence which was 
based on the inertness of noble gases. 
Lewis pictured the atom in terms of a 
positively charged ‘Kernel’ (the nucleus plus 
the inner electrons) and the outer shell that 
could accommodate a maximum of eight 
electrons. He, further assumed that these 
eight electrons occupy the corners of a cube 
which surround the ‘Kernel’. Thus the single 
outer shell electron of sodium would occupy 
one corner of the cube, while in the case of 
a noble gas all the eight corners would be 
occupied. This octet of electrons, represents 
a particularly stable electronic arrangement. 
Lewis postulated that atoms achieve 
the stable octet when they are linked by 
chemical bonds. In the case of sodium and 
chlorine, this can happen by the transfer of 
an electron from sodium to chlorine thereby 
giving the Na+ and Cl– ions. In the case of 
other molecules like Cl2, H2, F2, etc., the bond 
is formed by the sharing of a pair of electrons 
between the atoms. In the process each atom 
attains a stable outer octet of electrons.
Lewis Symbols: In the formation of a 
molecule, only the outer shell electrons take 
part in chemical combination and they are 
known as valence electrons. The inner shell 
electrons are well protected and are generally 
not involved in the combination process. 
G.N. Lewis, an American chemist introduced 
simple notations to represent valence electrons 
in an atom. These notations are called Lewis 
symbols. For example, the Lewis symbols for 
the elements of second period are as under:
Significance of Lewis Symbols : The 
number of dots around the symbol represents 
the number of valence electrons. This number 
of valence electrons helps to calculate the 
common or group valence of the element. 
The group valence of the elements is generally 
either equal to the number of dots in Lewis 
symbols or 8 minus the number of dots or 
valence electrons.
Kössel, in relation to chemical bonding, 
drew attention to the following facts:
• 
In the periodic table, the highly 
electronegative halogens and the highly 
electropositive alkali metals are separated 
by the noble gases;
• 
The formation of a negative ion from a 
halogen atom and a positive ion from 
an alkali metal atom is associated with 
the gain and loss of an electron by the 
respective atoms;
• 
The negative and positive ions thus 
formed attain stable noble gas electronic 
configurations. The noble gases (with the 
exception of helium which has a duplet 
of electrons) have a particularly stable 
outer shell configuration of eight (octet) 
electrons, ns2np6. 
• 
The negative and positive ions are stabilized 
by electrostatic attraction.
For example, the formation of NaCl from 
sodium and chlorine, according to the above 
scheme, can be explained as: 
Na                →       Na+   +    e–
[Ne] 3s1                   [Ne] 
Cl  +  e–          →        Cl–
[Ne] 3s2 3p5             [Ne] 3s2 3p6 or [Ar] 
Na+  +  Cl–     →        NaCl or Na+Cl–
Similarly the formation of CaF2 may be 
shown as:
Ca                →       Ca2+  +  2e–
[Ar]4s2                    [Ar]
F  + e–            →       F–
[He] 2s2 2p5             [He] 2s2 2p6  or [Ne]
Ca2+ + 2F–     →       CaF2   or  Ca2+(F– )2
The bond formed, as a result of the 
electrostatic attraction between the 
positive and negative ions was termed as 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 3 :
 102
chemistry
the electrovalent bond. The electrovalence 
is thus equal to the number of unit charge(s) 
on the ion. Thus, calcium is assigned a 
positive electrovalence of two, while chlorine 
a negative electrovalence of one. 
Kössel’s postulations provide the basis for 
the modern concepts regarding ion-formation 
by electron transfer and the formation of ionic 
crystalline compounds. His views have proved 
to be of great value in the understanding and 
systematisation of the ionic compounds. At 
the same time he did recognise the fact that 
a large number of compounds did not fit into 
these concepts.
4.1.1	 Octet Rule
Kössel and Lewis in 1916 developed an 
important theory of chemical combination 
between atoms known as electronic theory 
of chemical bonding. According to this, 
atoms  can combine either by transfer of 
valence electrons from one atom to another 
(gaining or losing) or by sharing of valence 
electrons in order to have an octet in their 
valence shells. This is known as octet rule.
4.1.2	 Covalent Bond
Langmuir (1919) refined the Lewis 
postulations by abandoning the idea of 
the stationary cubical arrangement of the 
octet, and by introducing the term covalent 
bond. The Lewis-Langmuir theory can be 
understood by considering the formation of 
the chlorine molecule, Cl2. The Cl atom with 
electronic configuration, [Ne]3s2 3p5, is one 
electron short of the argon configuration. 
The formation of the Cl­2 molecule can be 
understood in terms of the sharing of a pair 
of electrons between the two chlorine atoms, 
each chlorine atom contributing one electron 
to the shared pair. In the process both 
chlorine atoms attain the outer shell octet of 
the nearest noble gas (i.e., argon). 
The dots represent electrons. Such 
structures are referred to as Lewis dot 
structures.
The Lewis dot structures can be written for 
other molecules also, in which the combining 
atoms may be identical or different. The 
important conditions being that:
• 
Each bond is formed as a result of sharing 
of an electron pair between the atoms.
• 
Each combining atom contributes at least 
one electron to the shared pair.
• 
The combining atoms attain the outer-
shell noble gas configurations as a result 
of the sharing of electrons.
• 
Thus in water and carbon tetrachloride 
molecules, formation of covalent bonds 
can be represented as:
	
	
	
or Cl – Cl
Covalent bond between two Cl atoms
Thus, when two atoms share one 
electron pair they are said to be joined by 
a single covalent bond. In many compounds 
we have multiple bonds between atoms. The 
formation of multiple bonds envisages sharing 
of more than one electron pair between two 
atoms. If two atoms share two pairs of 
electrons, the covalent bond between them 
is called a double bond. For example, in the 
carbon dioxide molecule, we have two double 
bonds between the carbon and oxygen atoms. 
Similarly in ethene molecule the two carbon 
atoms are joined by a double bond.
Double bonds in CO2 molecule
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 4 :
 103
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
When combining atoms share three 
electron pairs as in the case of two nitrogen 
atoms in the N2 molecule and the two 
carbon atoms in the ethyne molecule, a 
triple bond is formed.
N2 molecule
C2H2 molecule
4.1.3	 Lewis Representation of Simple 
Molecules (the Lewis Structures)
The Lewis dot structures provide a picture 
of bonding in molecules and ions in terms of 
the shared pairs of electrons and the octet 
rule. While such a picture may not explain 
the bonding and behaviour of a molecule 
completely, it does help in understanding the 
formation and properties of a molecule to a 
large extent. Writing of Lewis dot structures of 
molecules is, therefore, very useful. The Lewis 
dot structures can be written by adopting the 
following steps:
• 
The total number of electrons required 
for writing the structures are obtained 
by adding the valence electrons of the 
combining atoms. For example, in the CH4 
molecule there are eight valence electrons 
available for bonding (4 from carbon and 
4 from the four hydrogen atoms).
• 
For anions, each negative charge would 
mean addition of one electron. For cations, 
each positive charge would result in 
subtraction of one electron from the total 
number of valence electrons. For example, 
for the CO3
2– ion, the two negative charges 
indicate that there are two additional 
electrons than those provided by the 
neutral atoms. For NH4
+ ion, one positive 
charge indicates the loss of one electron 
from the group of neutral atoms.
• 
Knowing the chemical symbols of the 
combining atoms and having knowledge 
of the skeletal structure of the compound 
(known or guessed intelligently), it is easy 
to distribute the total number of electrons 
as bonding shared pairs between the 
atoms in proportion to the total bonds.
• 
In general the least electronegative atom 
occupies the central position in the 
molecule/ion. For example in the NF3 and 
CO3
2–, nitrogen and carbon are the central 
atoms whereas fluorine and oxygen 
occupy the terminal positions.
• 
After accounting for the shared pairs of 
electrons for single bonds, the remaining 
electron pairs are either utilized for 
multiple bonding or remain as the lone 
pairs. The basic requirement being 
that each bonded atom gets an octet of 
electrons.
 
Lewis representations of a few molecules/ 
ions are given in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1	
The Lewis Representation of 
Some Molecules
* Each H atom attains the configuration of helium 
(a duplet of electrons)
C2H4 molecule
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 5 :
 104
chemistry
Problem 4.1
Write the Lewis dot structure of CO 
molecule.
Solution
Step 1. Count the total number of valence 
electrons of carbon and oxygen atoms. 
The outer (valence) shell configurations 
of carbon and oxygen atoms are: 2s2 2p2 
and 2s2 2p4, respectively. The valence 
electrons available are 4 + 6 =10.
Step 2. The skeletal structure of CO is 
written as: C  O
Step 3. Draw a single bond (one shared 
electron pair) between C and O and 
complete the octet on O, the remaining 
two electrons are the lone pair on C.
	 This does not complete the octet on 
carbon and hence we have to resort to 
multiple bonding (in this case a triple 
bond) between C and O atoms. This 
satisfies the octet rule condition for both 
atoms.
Problem 4.2
Write the Lewis structure of the nitrite 
ion, NO2
– .
Solution
Step 1. Count the total number of 
valence electrons of the nitrogen atom, 
the oxygen atoms and the additional one 
negative charge (equal to one electron).
 N(2s2 2p3), O (2s2 2p4)
 5 + (2 × 6) +1 = 18 electrons 
Step 2. The skeletal structure of NO2
– is 
written as :  O   N   O
Step 3. Draw a single bond (one shared 
electron pair) between the nitrogen and 
each of the oxygen atoms completing the 
octets on oxygen atoms. This, however, 
does not complete the octet on nitrogen 
if the remaining two electrons constitute 
lone pair on it.
 Hence we have to resort to multiple 
bonding between nitrogen and one of 
the oxygen atoms (in this case a double 
bond). This leads to the following Lewis 
dot structures.
4.1.4	 Formal Charge
Lewis dot structures, in general, do not 
represent the actual shapes of the molecules. 
In case of polyatomic ions, the net charge is 
possessed by the ion as a whole and not by 
a particular atom. It is, however, feasible to 
assign a formal charge on each atom. The 
formal charge of an atom in a polyatomic 
molecule or ion may be defined as the 
difference between the number of valence 
electrons of that atom in an isolated or free 
state and the number of electrons assigned 
to that atom in the Lewis structure. It is 
expressed as :
Formal charge (F.C.)  
on an atom in a Lewis 
structure
=
total number of valence 
electrons in the free 
atom
—
total number of non 
bonding (lone pair) 
electrons
— (1/2) 
total number of  
bonding (shared) 
electrons
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 6 :
 105
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
4.1.5	 Limitations of the Octet Rule
The octet rule, though useful, is not universal. 
It is quite useful for understanding the 
structures of most of the organic compounds 
and it applies mainly to the second period 
elements of the periodic table. There are three 
types of exceptions to the octet rule. 
The incomplete octet of the central atom
In some compounds, the number of electrons 
surrounding the central atom is less than 
eight. This is especially the case with elements 
having less than four valence electrons. 
Examples are LiCl, BeH2 and BCl3. 
Li, Be and B have 1, 2 and 3 valence electrons 
only. Some other such compounds are AlCl3 
and BF3.
Odd-electron molecules
In molecules with an odd number of electrons 
like nitric oxide, NO and nitrogen dioxide, 
NO2, the octet rule is not satisfied for all the 
atoms
The expanded octet
Elements in and beyond the third period of 
the periodic table have, apart from 3s and 3p 
orbitals, 3d orbitals also available for bonding. 
In a number of compounds of these elements 
there are more than eight valence electrons 
around the central atom. This is termed as 
the expanded octet. Obviously the octet rule 
does not apply in such cases. 
Some of the examples of such compounds 
are: PF5, SF6, H2SO4 and a number of 
coordination compounds.
The counting is based on the assumption 
that the atom in the molecule owns one 
electron of each shared pair and both the 
electrons of a lone pair.
Let us consider the ozone molecule (O3). 
The Lewis structure of O3 may be drawn as:
The atoms have been numbered as 1, 2 
and 3. The formal charge on:
• 
The central O atom marked 1
= 6 – 2 – 1
2
 (6) = +1
• 
The end O atom marked 2
= 6 – 4 – 1
2
 (4) = 0
• 
The end O atom marked 3
= 6 – 6 – 1
2
 (2) = –1
Hence, we represent O3 along with the 
formal charges as follows:
We must understand that formal charges 
do not indicate real charge separation within 
the molecule. Indicating the charges on the 
atoms in the Lewis structure only helps in 
keeping track of the valence electrons in 
the molecule. Formal charges help in the 
selection of the lowest energy structure from 
a number of possible Lewis structures for a 
given species. Generally the lowest energy 
structure is the one with the smallest 
formal charges on the atoms. The formal 
charge is a factor based on a pure covalent 
view of bonding in which electron pairs 
are shared equally by neighbouring atoms. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 7 :
 106
chemistry
Interestingly, sulphur also forms many 
compounds in which the octet rule is obeyed. 
In sulphur dichloride, the S atom has an octet 
of electrons around it. 
Other drawbacks of the octet theory 
• 
It is clear that octet rule is based upon 
the chemical inertness of noble gases. 
However, some noble gases (for example 
xenon and krypton) also combine with 
oxygen and fluorine to form a number of 
compounds like XeF2, KrF2, XeOF2 etc.
• 
This theory does not account for the shape 
of molecules.
• 
It does not explain the relative stability of 
the molecules being totally silent about 
the energy of a molecule.
4.2	
Ionic or Electrovalent Bond 
From the Kössel and Lewis treatment of the 
formation of an ionic bond, it follows that the 
formation of ionic compounds would primarily 
depend upon:
• 
The ease of formation of the positive and 
negative ions from the respective neutral 
atoms; 
• 
The arrangement of the positive and 
negative ions in the solid, that is, the 
lattice of the crystalline compound.
The formation of a positive ion involves 
ionization, i.e., removal of electron(s) from 
the neutral atom and that of the negative 
ion involves the addition of electron(s) to the 
neutral atom.
M(g)           →     M+(g) + e– ; 
 
                           Ionization enthalpy 
X(g) + e–     →     X – (g) ; 
                         Electron gain enthalpy
M+(g)  + X –(g)  →    MX(s)
The electron gain enthalpy, ∆egH, is the 
enthalpy change (Unit 3), when a gas phase 
atom in its ground state gains an electron. 
The electron gain process may be exothermic 
or endothermic. The ionization, on the other 
hand, is always endothermic. Electron 
affinity, is the negative of the energy change 
accompanying electron gain.    
Obviously ionic bonds will be formed 
more easily between elements with 
comparatively low ionization enthalpies 
and elements with comparatively high 
negative value of electron gain enthalpy. 
Most ionic compounds have cations 
derived from metallic elements and anions 
from non-metallic elements. The ammonium 
ion, NH4
+ (made up of two non-metallic 
elements) is an exception. It forms the cation 
of a number of ionic compounds.
Ionic compounds in the crystalline 
state consist of orderly three-dimensional 
arrangements of cations and anions held 
together by coulombic interaction energies. 
These compounds crystallise in different 
crystal structures determined by the size of 
the ions, their packing arrangements and 
other factors. The crystal structure of sodium 
chloride, NaCl (rock salt), for example is 
shown below.
Rock salt structure
In ionic solids, the sum of the electron gain 
enthalpy and the ionization enthalpy may be 
positive but still the crystal structure gets 
stabilized due to the energy released in the 
formation of the crystal lattice. For example: 
the ionization enthalpy for Na+(g) formation 
from Na(g) is 495.8 kJ mol–1 ; while the electron 
gain enthalpy for the change Cl(g) + e–→ 
Cl– (g) is, – 348.7 kJ mol–1 only. The sum of the 
two, 147.1 kJ mol-1 is more than compensated 
for by the enthalpy of lattice formation of 
NaCl(s) (–788 kJ mol–1). Therefore, the energy 
released in the processes is more than the 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 8 :
 107
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
energy absorbed. Thus a qualitative measure 
of the stability of an ionic compound 
is provided by its enthalpy of  lattice 
formation and not simply by achieving 
octet of electrons around the ionic species 
in gaseous state.
Since lattice enthalpy plays a key role 
in the formation of ionic compounds, it is 
important that we learn more about it.
4.2.1	 Lattice Enthalpy
The Lattice Enthalpy of an ionic solid 
is defined as the energy required to 
completely separate one mole of a solid 
ionic compound into gaseous constituent 
ions. For example, the lattice enthalpy of 
NaCl is 788 kJ mol–1. This means that 788 
kJ of energy is required to separate one mole 
of solid NaCl into one mole of Na+ (g) and one 
mole of Cl– (g) to an infinite distance.
This process involves both the attractive 
forces between ions of opposite charges 
and the repulsive forces between ions of 
like charge. The solid crystal being three-
dimensional; it is not possible to calculate 
lattice enthalpy directly from the interaction 
of forces of attraction and repulsion only. 
Factors associated with the crystal geometry 
have to be included.
4.3 Bond Parameters
4.3.1	 Bond Length
Bond length is defined as the equilibrium 
distance between the nuclei of two bonded 
atoms in a molecule. Bond lengths are 
measured by spectroscopic, X-ray diffraction 
and electron-diffraction techniques about 
which you will learn in higher classes. Each 
atom of the bonded pair contributes to the 
bond length (Fig. 4.1). In the case of a covalent 
bond, the contribution from each atom is 
called the covalent radius of that atom. 
The covalent radius is measured 
approximately as the radius of an atom’s 
core which is in contact with the core of an 
adjacent atom in a bonded situation. The 
covalent radius is half of the distance between 
two similar atoms joined by a covalent bond 
in the same molecule. The van der Waals 
radius represents the overall size of the 
atom which includes its valence shell in a 
nonbonded situation. Further, the van der 
Waals radius is half of the distance between 
two similar atoms in separate molecules in 
a solid. Covalent and van der Waals radii of 
chlorine are depicted in Fig. 4.2.  
Fig. 4.2	
Covalent and van der Waals radii in 
a chlorine molecule. The inner circles 
correspond to the size of the chlorine 
atom (rvdw and rc are van der Waals and 
covalent radii respectively). 
r = 99 pm
c
198 pm
r
= 180 pm
vdw
360 pm
Fig. 4.1  The bond length in a covalent  
molecule AB. 
R = rA + rB (R is the bond length and rA and rB are 
the covalent radii of atoms A and B  
respectively)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 9 :
 108
chemistry
Some typical average bond lengths for 
single, double and triple bonds are shown in 
Table 4.2. Bond lengths for some common 
molecules are given in Table 4.3.
The covalent radii of some common 
elements are listed in Table 4.4.
4.3.2	 Bond Angle 
It is defined as the angle between the orbitals 
containing bonding electron pairs around the 
central atom in a molecule/complex ion. Bond 
angle is expressed in degree which can be 
experimentally determined by spectroscopic 
methods. It gives some idea regarding the 
distribution of orbitals around the central 
atom in a molecule/complex ion and hence it 
helps us in determining its shape. For 
example H–O–H bond angle in water can be 
represented as under :
4.3.3	 Bond Enthalpy 
It is defined as the amount of energy required 
to break one mole of bonds of a particular 
type between two atoms in a gaseous state. 
The unit of bond enthalpy is kJ mol–1. For 
example, the H – H bond enthalpy in hydrogen 
molecule is 435.8 kJ mol–1.
H2(g) → H(g) + H(g); ∆aH = 435.8 kJ mol–1
Similarly the bond enthalpy for molecules 
containing multiple bonds, for example O2 and 
N2 will be as under :
O2 (O = O) (g) → O(g) + O(g); 
                                               ∆aH = 498 kJ mol–1
N2 (N ≡ N) (g) → N(g) + N(g); 
                                             ∆aH = 946.0 kJ mol–1
It is important that larger the bond 
dissociation enthalpy, stronger will be the 
bond in the molecule. For a heteronuclear 
diatomic molecules like HCl, we have
HCl (g) → H(g) + Cl (g); ∆aH = 431.0 kJ mol–1
In case of polyatomic molecules, the 
measurement of bond strength is more 
complicated. For example in case  of H2O 
molecule, the enthalpy needed to break the 
two O – H bonds is not the same.
Table 4.2	
Average Bond Lengths for Some 
Single, Double and Triple Bonds
Bond Type
Covalent Bond 
Length (pm)
O–H
C–H
N–O
C–O
C–N
C–C
C=O
N=O
C=C
C=N
C≡N
C≡C
96
107
136
143
143
154
121
122
133
138
116
120
Table 4.3	
Bond Lengths in Some Common 
Molecules
Molecule
Bond Length (pm)
H2 (H – H)
F2 (F – F)
Cl2 (Cl – Cl)
Br2 (Br – Br)
I2 (I – I)
N2 (N ≡ N)
O2 (O = O)
HF (H – F)
HCl (H – Cl)
HBr (H – Br)
HI (H – I)
74
144
199
228
267
109
121
92
127
141
160
Table 4.4  Covalent Radii, *rcov/(pm)
*	 The values cited are for single bonds, except where 
otherwise indicated in parenthesis. (See also Unit 3 for 
periodic trends).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 10 :
 109
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
H2O(g)  →  H(g) + OH(g); ∆aH1
 =  502 kJ mol–1
OH(g)  →  H(g) + O(g); ∆aH2
 = 427 kJ mol–1
The difference in the ∆aH value shows 
that the second O – H bond undergoes 
some change because of changed chemical 
environment. This is the reason for some 
difference in energy of the same O – H bond 
in different molecules like C2H5OH (ethanol) 
and water. Therefore in polyatomic molecules 
the term mean or average bond enthalpy 
is used. It is obtained by dividing total bond 
dissociation enthalpy by the number of bonds 
broken as explained below in case of water 
molecule,
Average bond enthalpy = 
502
427
2
+
 
                                = 464.5 kJ mol–1
4.3.4	 Bond Order
In the Lewis description of covalent bond, 
the Bond Order is given by the number 
of bonds between the two atoms in a 
molecule. The bond order, for example in 
H2 (with a single shared electron pair), in O2 
(with two shared electron pairs) and in N2 
(with three shared electron pairs) is 1,2,3 
respectively. Similarly in CO (three shared 
electron pairs between C and O) the bond 
order is 3. For N2, bond order is 3 and its 
 is 946 kJ mol–1; being one of the highest 
for a diatomic molecule. 
Isoelectronic molecules and ions have 
identical bond orders; for example, F2 and 
O2 
2– have bond order 1. N2, CO and NO+ have 
bond order 3.
A general correlation useful for 
understanding the stablities of molecules 
is that: with increase in bond order, 
bond enthalpy increases and bond length 
decreases. 
4.3.5	 Resonance Structures
It is often observed that a single Lewis structure 
is inadequate for the representation of a 
molecule in conformity with its experimentally 
determined parameters. For example, the 
ozone, O3 molecule can be equally represented 
by the structures I and II shown below:
In both structures we have a O–O single 
bond and a O=O double bond. The normal 
O–O and O=O bond lengths are 148 pm 
and 121 pm respectively. Experimentally 
determined oxygen-oxygen bond lengths in 
the O3 molecule are same (128 pm). Thus the 
oxygen-oxygen bonds in the O3 molecule are 
intermediate between a double and a single 
bond. Obviously, this cannot be represented 
by either of the two Lewis structures shown 
above. 
The concept of resonance was introduced 
to deal with the type of difficulty experienced 
in the depiction of accurate structures of 
molecules like O3. According to the concept 
of resonance, whenever a single Lewis 
structure cannot describe a molecule 
accurately, a number of structures with 
similar energy, positions of nuclei, bonding 
and non-bonding pairs of electrons are 
taken as the canonical structures of the 
hybrid which describes the molecule 
accurately. Thus for O3, the two structures 
shown above constitute the canonical 
structures or resonance structures and 
their hybrid i.e., the III structure represents 
the structure of O3 more accurately. This is 
also called resonance hybrid. Resonance is 
represented by a double headed arrow.
Fig. 4.3	
Resonance in the O3 molecule
(structures I and II represent the two canonical 
forms while the structure III is the resonance hybrid)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 11 :
 110
chemistry
Some of the other examples of resonance 
structures are provided by the carbonate ion 
and the carbon dioxide molecule.
Problem 4.3 
Explain the structure of CO3
2– ion in 
terms of resonance.
Solution
The single Lewis structure based on 
the presence of two single bonds and 
one double bond between carbon 
and oxygen atoms is inadequate to 
represent the molecule accurately as it 
represents unequal bonds. According 
to the experimental findings, all carbon 
to oxygen bonds in CO3
2– are equivalent. 
Therefore the carbonate ion is best 
described as a resonance hybrid of the 
canonical forms I, II, and III shown below.
Problem 4.4  
Explain the structure of CO2 molecule.
Solution
The experimentally determined carbon 
to oxygen bond length in CO 2 is  
115 pm. The lengths of a normal 
carbon to oxygen double bond (C=O) 
and carbon to oxygen triple bond (C≡O) 
are 121 pm and 110 pm respectively. 
The carbon-oxygen bond lengths in 
CO2 (115 pm) lie between the values 
for C=O and C≡O. Obviously, a single 
Lewis structure cannot depict this 
position and it becomes necessary to 
write more than one Lewis structures 
and to consider that the structure of 
CO2 is best described as a hybrid of 
the canonical or resonance forms I, II  
and III.
In general, it may be stated that 
• 
Resonance stabilizes the molecule as the 
energy of the resonance hybrid is less 
than the energy of any single cannonical 
structure; and,
• 
R e s o n a n c e  a v e r a g e s  t h e  b o n d 
characteristics as a whole.
 
Thus the energy of the O3 resonance 
hybrid is lower than either of the two 
cannonical froms I and II (Fig. 4.3).
Many misconceptions are associated 
with resonance and the same need to be 
dispelled. You should remember that :
• 
The cannonical forms have no real 
existence.
• 
The molecule does not exist for a certain 
fraction of time in one cannonical form 
and for other fractions of time in other 
cannonical forms.
• 
There is no such  equilibrium between 
the cannonical forms as we have 
between tautomeric forms (keto and 
enol) in tautomerism.
• 
The molecule as such has a single 
structure which is the resonance 
hybrid of the cannonical forms and 
which cannot as such be depicted by 
a single Lewis structure.
4.3.6	 Polarity of Bonds 
The existence of a hundred percent ionic or 
covalent bond represents an ideal situation. 
In reality no bond or a compound is either 
completely covalent or ionic. Even in case of 
covalent bond between two hydrogen atoms, 
there is some ionic character.
When covalent bond is formed between 
two similar atoms, for example in H2, O2, 
Cl2, N2 or F2, the shared pair of electrons is 
equally attracted by the two atoms. As a result 
Fig. 4.4	
Resonance in CO3
2–, I, II and III 
represent the three canonical 
forms. 
Fig. 4.5	
Resonance in CO2 molecule, I, II 
and III represent the three canonical 
forms.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 12 :
 111
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
electron pair is situated exactly between the 
two identical nuclei. The bond so formed is 
called nonpolar covalent bond. Contrary to 
this in case of a heteronuclear molecule like 
HF, the shared electron pair between the two 
atoms gets displaced more towards fluorine 
since the electronegativity of fluorine (Unit 3) 
is far greater than that of hydrogen. The 
resultant covalent bond is a polar covalent 
bond. 
As a result of polarisation, the molecule 
possesses the dipole moment (depicted 
below) which can be defined as the product of 
the magnitude of the charge and the distance 
between the centres of positive and negative 
charge. It is usually designated by a Greek 
letter ‘µ’. Mathematically, it is expressed as 
follows :
Dipole moment (µ) = charge (Q) × distance of 
                                                separation (r)
Dipole moment is usually expressed in 
Debye units (D). The conversion factor is
 
1 D = 3.33564 × 10–30  C m
where C is coulomb and m is meter.
Further dipole moment is a vector quantity 
and by convention it is depicted by a small 
arrow with tail on the negative centre and 
head pointing towards the positive centre. 
But in chemistry presence of dipole moment 
is represented by the crossed arrow (
) 
put on Lewis structure of the molecule. The 
cross is on positive end and arrow head is on 
negative end. For example the dipole moment 
of HF may be represented as :
This arrow symbolises the direction of the 
shift of electron density in the molecule. Note 
that the direction of crossed arrow is opposite 
to the conventional direction of dipole moment 
vector. 
H         F 
In case of polyatomic molecules the dipole 
moment not only depend upon the individual 
dipole moments of bonds known as bond 
dipoles but also on the spatial arrangement 
of various bonds in the molecule. In such 
case, the dipole moment of a molecule is the 
vector sum of the dipole moments of various 
bonds. For example in H2O molecule, which 
has a bent structure, the two O–H bonds are 
oriented at an angle of 104.50. Net dipole 
moment of 6.17 × 10–30 C m (1D = 3.33564 
× 10–30 C m) is the resultant of the dipole 
moments of two O–H bonds.
Net Dipole moment, µ  = 1.85 D 
= 1.85 × 3.33564 × 10–30 C m = 6.17 ×10–30 C m
The dipole moment in case of BeF2 is zero. 
This is because the two equal bond dipoles 
point in opposite directions and cancel the 
effect of each other.
In tetra-atomic molecule, for example in 
BF3, the dipole moment is zero although the 
B – F bonds are oriented at an angle of 120o 
to one another, the three bond moments give 
a net sum of zero as the resultant of any two 
is equal and opposite to the third.
Let us study an interesting case of NH3 
and NF3 molecule. Both the molecules have 
pyramidal shape with a lone pair of electrons 
on nitrogen atom. Although fluorine is more 
electronegative than nitrogen, the resultant 
Peter Debye, the Dutch chemist 
received Nobel prize in 1936 for 
his work on X-ray diffraction and 
dipole moments. The magnitude 
of the dipole moment is given in 
Debye units in order to honour him.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 13 :
 112
chemistry
dipole moment of NH3 (4.90 × 10–30 C m) is 
greater than that of NF3 (0.8 × 10–30 C m). This 
is because, in case of NH3 the orbital dipole 
due to lone pair is in the same direction as 
the resultant dipole moment of the N – H 
bonds, whereas in NF3 the orbital dipole is in 
the direction opposite to the resultant dipole 
moment of the three N–F bonds. The orbital 
dipole because of lone pair decreases the effect 
of the resultant N – F bond moments, which 
results in the low dipole moment of NF3 as 
represented below :
• 
The smaller the size of the cation and the 
larger the size of the anion, the greater 
the covalent character of an ionic bond.
• 
The greater the charge on the cation, the 
greater the covalent character of the ionic 
bond.
• 
For cations of the same size and charge, 
the one, with electronic configuration  
(n-1)dnnso, typical of transition metals, is 
more polarising than the one with a noble 
gas configuration, ns2 np6, typical of alkali 
and alkaline earth metal cations.
 
The cation polarises the anion, pulling 
the electronic charge toward itself and 
thereby increasing the electronic charge 
between the two. This is precisely what 
happens in a covalent bond, i.e., buildup 
of electron charge density between the 
nuclei. The polarising power of the cation, 
the polarisability of the anion and the 
extent of distortion (polarisation) of anion 
are the factors, which determine the per 
cent covalent character of the ionic bond. 
4.4	
The Valence Shell Electron 
Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) Theory
As already explained, Lewis concept is unable 
to explain the shapes of molecules. This 
theory provides a simple procedure to predict 
the shapes of covalent molecules. Sidgwick 
Dipole moments of some molecules are 
shown in Table 4.5.
Just as all the covalent bonds have 
some partial ionic character, the ionic 
bonds also have partial covalent character. 
The partial covalent character of ionic 
bonds was discussed by Fajans in terms of 
the following rules:
Table 4.5  Dipole Moments of Selected Molecules
Type of Molecule
Example
Dipole  
Moment, µ(D)
Geometry
Molecule (AB)
HF
HCl
HBr
Hl
H2
1.78
1.07
0.79
0.38
0
linear
linear
linear
linear
linear
Molecule (AB2)
H2O
H2S
CO2
1.85
0.95
0
bent
bent
linear
Molecule (AB3)
NH3
NF3
BF3
1.47
0.23
0
trigonal-pyramidal
trigonal-pyramidal
trigonal-planar
Molecule (AB4)
CH4
CHCl3
CCl4
0
1.04
0
tetrahedral
tetrahedral
tetrahedral
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 14 :
 113
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
and Powell in 1940, proposed a simple theory 
based on the repulsive interactions of the 
electron pairs in the valence shell of the 
atoms. It was further developed and redefined 
by Nyholm and Gillespie (1957). 
The main postulates of VSEPR theory are 
as follows:
• 
The shape of a molecule depends upon 
the number of valence shell electron pairs 
(bonded or nonbonded) around the central 
atom.
• 
Pairs of electrons in the valence shell repel 
one another since their electron clouds are 
negatively charged.
• 
These pairs of electrons tend to occupy 
such positions in space that minimise 
repulsion and thus maximise distance 
between them.
• 
The valence shell is taken as a sphere 
with the electron pairs localising on the 
spherical surface at maximum distance 
from one another.
• 
A multiple bond is treated as if it is a single 
electron pair and the two or three electron 
pairs of a multiple bond are treated as a 
single super pair. 
• 
Where two or more resonance structures 
can represent a molecule, the VSEPR 
model is applicable to any such structure.
The repulsive interaction of electron pairs 
decrease in the order:
Lone pair (lp) – Lone pair (lp) > Lone pair 
(lp) – Bond pair (bp) > Bond pair (bp) – 
Bond pair (bp) 
Nyholm and Gillespie (1957) refined the 
VSEPR model by explaining the important 
difference between the lone pairs and bonding 
pairs of electrons. While the lone pairs are 
localised on the central atom, each bonded 
pair is shared between two atoms. As a result, 
the lone pair electrons in a molecule occupy 
more space as compared to the bonding pairs 
of electrons. This results in greater repulsion 
between lone pairs of electrons as compared 
to the lone pair - bond pair and bond pair - 
bond pair repulsions. These repulsion effects 
result in deviations from idealised shapes and 
alterations in bond angles in molecules.
For the prediction of geometrical shapes 
of molecules with the help of VSEPR theory, 
it is convenient to divide molecules into 
two categories as (i) molecules in which 
the central atom has no lone pair and  
(ii) molecules in which the central atom 
has one or more lone pairs. 
Table 4.6 (page114) shows the 
arrangement of electron pairs about a 
central atom A (without any lone pairs) and 
geometries of some molecules/ions of the type 
AB. Table 4.7 (page 115) shows shapes of some 
simple molecules and ions in which the central 
atom has one or more lone pairs. Table 4.8 
(page 116) explains the reasons for the 
distortions in the geometry of the molecule.
As depicted in Table 4.6, in the 
compounds of AB2, AB3, AB4, AB5 and AB6, 
the arrangement of electron pairs and the 
B atoms around the central atom A are : 
linear, trigonal planar, tetrahedral, 
trigonal-bipyramidal and octahedral, 
respectively. Such arrangement can be seen 
in the molecules like BF3 (AB3), CH4 (AB4) and 
PCl5 (AB5) as depicted below by their ball and 
stick models. 
The VSEPR Theory is able to predict 
geometry of a large number of molecules, 
especially the compounds of p-block elements 
accurately. It is also quite successful in 
determining the geometry quite-accurately 
even when the energy difference between 
possible structures is very small. The 
theoretical basis of the VSEPR theory regarding 
the effects of electron pair repulsions on 
molecular shapes is not clear and continues 
to be a subject of doubt and discussion.
Fig. 4.6	
The shapes of molecules in which 
central atom has no lone pair
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 15 :
 114
chemistry
Table 4.6 Geometry of Molecules in which the Central Atom has No Lone Pair of Electrons
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 16 :
 115
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
Table 4.7	
Shape (geometry) of Some Simple Molecules/Ions with Central Ions having 
One or More Lone Pairs of Electrons(E).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 17 :
 116
chemistry
Theoretically the shape 
should have been triangular 
planar but actually it is found 
to be bent or v-shaped. The 
reason being the lone pair-
bond pair repulsion is much 
more as compared to the bond 
pair-bond pair repulsion. So 
the angle is reduced to 119.5° 
from 120°.
Had there been a bp in place 
of lp the shape would have 
been tetrahedral but one 
lone pair is present and due 
to the repulsion between  
lp-bp (which is more than 
bp-bp repulsion) the angle 
between bond pairs is 
reduced to 107° from 109.5°.
The shape should have been 
tetrahedral if there were all bp 
but two lp are present so the 
shape is distorted tetrahedral 
or angular. The reason is 
lp-lp repulsion is more than 
lp-bp repulsion which is more 
than bp-bp repulsion. Thus, 
the angle is reduced to 104.5° 
from 109.5°.
Bent
Trigonal
pyramidal
Bent
AB2E
4
1
AB3E
3
1
AB2E2
2
2
In (a) the lp is present at axial 
position so there are three  
lp—bp repulsions at 90°. 
In(b) the lp is in an equatorial 
position, and there are two 
lp—bp repulsions. Hence, 
arrangement (b) is more 
stable. The shape shown in 
(b) is described as a distorted 
tetrahedron, a folded square 
or a see-saw.
See-
saw
AB4E
4
1
(More stable)
Table 4.8  Shapes of Molecules containing Bond Pair and Lone Pair
Shape
Reason for the 
shape acquired
Arrangement 
of electrons
No. of
lone 
pairs
No. of 
bonding 
pairs
Molecule 
type
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 18 :
 117
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
In (a) the lp are at 
equatorial position 
so there are less lp-
bp repulsions as 
compared to others 
in which the lp are 
at axial positions. So 
structure (a) is most 
stable. (T-shaped). 
T-shape
AB3E2
3
2
Shape
Reason for the 
shape acquired
Arrangement 
of electrons
No. of
lone 
pairs
No. of 
bonding 
pairs
Molecule 
type
4.5	
Valence Bond Theory 
As we know that Lewis approach helps in 
writing the structure of molecules but it 
fails to explain the formation of chemical 
bond. It also does not give any reason for the 
difference in bond dissociation enthalpies and 
bond lengths in molecules like H2 (435.8 kJ 
mol-1, 74 pm) and F2 (155 kJ mol-1, 144 pm), 
although in both the cases a single covalent 
bond is formed by the sharing of an electron 
pair between the respective atoms. It also 
gives no idea about the shapes of polyatomic 
molecules.
Similarly the VSEPR theory gives the 
geometry of simple molecules but theoretically, 
it does not explain them and also it has limited 
applications. To overcome these limitations 
the two important theories based on quantum 
mechanical principles are introduced. These 
are valence bond (VB) theory and molecular 
orbital (MO) theory.
Valence bond theory was introduced 
by Heitler and London (1927) and developed 
further by Pauling and others. A discussion 
of the valence bond theory is based on the 
knowledge of atomic orbitals, electronic 
configurations of elements (Units 2), the 
overlap criteria of atomic orbitals, the 
hybridization of atomic orbitals and the 
principles of variation and superposition. A 
rigorous treatment of the VB theory in terms 
of these aspects is beyond the scope of this 
book. Therefore, for the sake of convenience, 
valence bond theory has been discussed in 
terms of qualitative and non-mathematical 
treatment only. To start with, let us consider 
the formation of hydrogen molecule which is 
the simplest of all molecules.
Consider two hydrogen atoms A and B 
approaching each other having nuclei NA 
and NB and electrons present in them are 
represented by eA and eB. When the two atoms 
are at large distance from each other, there 
is no interaction between them. As these two 
atoms approach each other, new attractive 
and repulsive forces begin to operate.
Attractive forces arise between:
(i) 
nucleus of one atom and its own electron 
that is NA – eA and NB– eB.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 19 :
 118
chemistry
(ii) 
nucleus of one atom and electron of 
other atom i.e., NA– eB, NB– eA.
Similarly repulsive forces arise between 
(i) 
electrons of two atoms like eA – eB, 
(ii) 
nuclei of two atoms NA – NB.
Attractive forces tend to bring the two 
atoms close to each other whereas repulsive 
forces tend to push them apart (Fig. 4.7). 
Experimentally it has been found that 
the magnitude of new attractive force is 
more than the new repulsive forces. As a 
result, two atoms approach each other and 
potential energy decreases. Ultimately a stage 
is reached where the net force of attraction 
balances the force of repulsion and system 
acquires minimum energy. At this stage 
two hydrogen atoms are said to be bonded 
Fig. 4.7	
Forces of attraction and repulsion 
during the formation of H2 molecule
together to form a stable molecule having the 
bond length of 74 pm. 
Since the energy gets released when the 
bond is formed between two hydrogen atoms, 
the hydrogen molecule is more stable than 
that of isolated hydrogen atoms. The energy 
so released is called as bond enthalpy, which 
is corresponding to minimum in the curve 
depicted in Fig. 4.8. Conversely, 435.8 kJ of 
energy is required to dissociate one mole of 
H2 molecule.
H2(g) + 435.8 kJ mol–1 → H(g) + H(g)
4.5.1 Orbital Overlap Concept 
In the formation of hydrogen molecule, 
there is a minimum energy state when two 
hydrogen atoms are so near that their atomic 
orbitals undergo partial interpenetration. This 
partial merging of atomic orbitals is called 
overlapping of atomic orbitals which results in 
the pairing of electrons. The extent of overlap 
decides the strength of a covalent bond. In 
general, greater the overlap the stronger is the 
bond formed between two atoms. Therefore, 
according to orbital overlap concept, the 
formation of a covalent bond between two 
atoms results by pairing of electrons present 
in the valence shell having opposite spins.
Fig. 4.8 	
The potential energy curve for the 
formation of H2 molecule as a function 
of internuclear distance of the H atoms. 
The minimum in the curve corresponds 
to the most stable state of H2.  
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 20 :
 119
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
4.5.2  Directional Properties of Bonds
As we have already seen, the covalent bond 
is formed by overlapping of atomic orbitals. 
The molecule of hydrogen is formed due to the 
overlap of 1s-orbitals of two H atoms.
In case of polyatomic molecules like CH4, 
NH3 and H2O, the geometry of the molecules 
is also important in addition to the bond 
formation. For example why is it so that CH4 
molecule has tetrahedral shape and HCH 
bond angles are 109.5°? Why is the shape of 
NH3 molecule pyramidal ?
The valence bond theory explains the 
shape, the formation and directional properties 
of bonds in polyatomic molecules like CH4, 
NH3 and H2O, etc. in terms of overlap and 
hybridisation of atomic orbitals.
4.5.3	 Overlapping of Atomic Orbitals
When orbitals of two atoms come close to form 
bond, their overlap may be positive, negative 
or zero depending upon the sign (phase) and 
direction of orientation of amplitude of orbital 
wave function in space (Fig. 4.9). Positive and 
negative sign on boundary surface diagrams 
in the Fig. 4.9 show the sign (phase) of orbital 
wave function and are not related to charge. 
Orbitals forming bond should have same sign 
(phase) and orientation in space. This is called 
positive overlap. Various overlaps of s and p 
orbitals are depicted in Fig. 4.9.
The criterion of overlap, as the main factor 
for the formation of covalent bonds applies 
uniformly to the homonuclear/heteronuclear 
diatomic molecules and polyatomic molecules. 
We know that the shapes of CH4, NH3, and 
H2O molecules are tetrahedral, pyramidal 
and bent respectively. It would be therefore 
interesting to use VB theory to find out if these 
geometrical shapes can be explained in terms 
of the orbital overlaps.
Let us first consider the CH4 (methane) 
molecule. The electronic configuration of 
carbon in its ground state is [He]2s2 2p2 which 
in the excited state becomes [He] 2s1 2px
1 2py
1 
2pz
1. The energy required for this excitation is 
compensated by the release of energy due to  
overlap between the orbitals of carbon and the 
Fig.4.9	
Positive, negative and zero overlaps of 
s and p atomic orbitals 
hydrogen. The four atomic orbitals of carbon, 
each with an unpaired electron can overlap 
with the 1s orbitals of the four H atoms which 
are also singly occupied. This will result in the 
formation of four C-H bonds. It will, however, 
be observed that while the three p orbitals of 
carbon are at 90° to one another, the HCH 
angle for these will also be 90°. That is three 
C-H bonds will be oriented at 90° to one 
another. The 2s orbital of carbon and the 1s 
orbital of H are spherically symmetrical and 
they can overlap in any direction. Therefore 
the direction of the fourth C-H bond cannot 
be ascertained. This description does not fit 
in with the tetrahedral HCH angles of 109.5°. 
Clearly, it follows that simple atomic orbital 
overlap does not account for the directional 
characteristics of bonds in CH4. Using similar 
procedure and arguments, it can be seen that in 
the case of NH3 and H2O molecules, the HNH 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 21 :
 120
chemistry
and HOH angles should be 90°. This is in 
disagreement with the actual bond angles of 
107° and 104.5° in the NH3 and H2O molecules 
respectively.
4.5.4	 Types of Overlapping and Nature of 
Covalent Bonds 
The covalent bond may be classified into 
two types depending upon the types of 
overlapping:
(i) Sigma(σ) bond, and (ii) pi(π) bond
(i)	
Sigma(σ) bond : This type of covalent 
bond is formed by the end to end (head-
on) overlap of bonding orbitals along the 
internuclear axis. This is called as head 
on overlap or axial overlap. This can be 
formed by any one of the following types 
of combinations of atomic orbitals.
• 
s-s overlapping : In this case, there is 
overlap of two half filled s-orbitals along 
the internuclear axis as shown below :
• 
s-p overlapping: This type of overlap 
occurs between half filled s-orbitals of one 
atom and half filled p-orbitals of another 
atom.
• 
p–p overlapping : This type of overlap 
takes place between half filled p-orbitals 
of the two approaching atoms.
(ii) 
pi( ) bond : In the formation of π bond 
the atomic orbitals overlap in such a 
way that their axes remain parallel to 
each other and perpendicular to the 
internuclear axis. The orbitals formed 
due to sidewise overlapping consists 
of two saucer type charged clouds  
above and below the plane of the 
participating atoms.
4.5.5	 Strength of Sigma and pi Bonds 
Basically the strength of a bond depends 
upon the extent of overlapping. In case of 
sigma bond, the overlapping of orbitals takes 
place to a larger extent. Hence, it is stronger 
as compared to the pi bond where the extent 
of overlapping occurs to a smaller extent. 
Further, it is important to note that in the 
formation of multiple bonds between two 
atoms of a molecule, pi bond(s) is formed in 
addition to a sigma bond.
4.6	
Hybridisation
In order to explain the characteristic 
geometrical shapes of polyatomic molecules 
like CH4, NH3 and H2O etc., Pauling introduced 
the concept of hybridisation. According to him 
the atomic orbitals combine to form new set of 
equivalent orbitals known as hybrid orbitals. 
Unlike pure orbitals, the hybrid orbitals are 
used in bond formation. The phenomenon is 
known as hybridisation which can be defined 
as the process of intermixing of the orbitals of 
slightly different energies so as to redistribute 
their energies, resulting in the formation of 
new set of orbitals of equivalent energies and 
shape. For example when one 2s and three 
2p-orbitals of carbon hybridise, there is the 
formation of four new sp3 hybrid orbitals.
Salient features of hybridisation: The main 
features of hybridisation are as under :
1. The number of hybrid orbitals is equal to 
the number of the atomic orbitals that get 
hybridised.
2. The hybridised orbitals are always 
equivalent in energy and shape.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 22 :
 121
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
3. The hybrid orbitals are more effective in 
forming stable bonds than the pure atomic 
orbitals.
4. These hybrid orbitals are directed in 
space in some preferred direction to have 
minimum repulsion between electron 
pairs and thus a stable arrangement. 
Therefore, the type of hybridisation 
indicates the geometry of the molecules.
Important conditions for hybridisation 
(i) 
The orbitals present in the valence shell 
of the atom are hybridised.
(ii) 
The orbitals undergoing hybridisation 
should have almost equal energy.
(iii) Promotion of electron is not essential 
condition prior to hybridisation.
(iv) 
It is not necessary that only half filled 
orbitals participate in hybridisation. 
In some cases, even filled orbitals of 
valence shell take part in hybridisation.
4.6.1  Types of Hybridisation 
There are various types of hybridisation 
involving s, p and d orbitals. The different 
types of hybridisation are as under:
(I) sp hybridisation: This type of hybridisation 
involves the mixing of one s and one p orbital 
resulting in the formation of two equivalent 
sp hybrid orbitals. The suitable orbitals for 
sp hybridisation are s and pz, if the hybrid 
orbitals are to lie along the z-axis. Each sp 
hybrid orbitals has 50% s-character and 
50% p-character. Such a molecule in which 
the central atom is sp-hybridised and linked 
directly to two other central atoms possesses 
linear geometry. This type of hybridisation is 
also known as diagonal hybridisation.
The two sp hybrids point in the opposite 
direction along the z-axis with projecting 
positive lobes and very small negative lobes, 
which provides more effective overlapping 
resulting in the formation of stronger bonds. 
Example 
of 
molecule 
having 
sp 
hybridisation 
BeCl 2: The ground state electronic 
configuration of Be is 1s22s2. In the exited 
state one of the 2s-electrons is promoted to 
vacant 2p orbital to account for its bivalency. 
One 2s and one 2p-orbital gets hybridised to 
form two sp hybridised orbitals. These two  
sp hybrid orbitals are oriented in opposite 
direction forming an angle of 180°. Each of 
the sp hybridised orbital overlaps with the 
2p-orbital of chlorine axially and form two Be-
Cl sigma bonds. This is shown in Fig. 4.10.
(II) sp2 hybridisation : In this hybridisation 
there is involvement of one s and two  
p-orbitals in order to form three equivalent 
sp2 hybridised orbitals. For example, in 
BCl3 molecule, the ground state electronic 
configuration of central boron atom is 
1s22s22p1. In the excited state, one of the 2s 
electrons is promoted to vacant 2p orbital as  
Fig.4.10	
(a) Formation of  sp hybrids from s and 
p orbitals;  (b) Formation of the linear 
BeCl2 molecule
Be
Fig.4.11	
Formation of sp2 hybrids and the BCl3 
molecule
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 23 :
 122
chemistry
a result boron has three unpaired electrons. 
These three orbitals (one 2s and two 2p) 
hybridise to form three sp2 hybrid orbitals. 
The three hybrid orbitals so formed are 
oriented in a trigonal planar arrangement 
and overlap with 2p orbitals of chlorine to 
form three B-Cl bonds. Therefore, in BCl3  
(Fig. 4.11), the geometry is trigonal planar 
with ClBCl bond angle of 120°.
(III) sp 3 hybridisation: This type of 
hybridisation can be explained by taking the 
example of CH4 molecule in which there is 
mixing of one s-orbital and three p-orbitals 
of the valence shell to form four sp3 hybrid 
orbital of equivalent energies and shape. There 
is 25% s-character and 75% p-character in 
each sp3 hybrid orbital. The four sp3 hybrid 
orbitals so formed are directed towards the 
four corners of the tetrahedron. The angle 
between sp3 hybrid orbital is 109.5° as shown 
in Fig. 4.12.
Fig.4.12	
Formation of sp3 hybrids by the 
combination of s, px , py and pz atomic 
orbitals of carbon and the formation of 
CH4 molecule
σ
σ
σ
σ
The structure of NH3 and H2O molecules 
can also be explained with the help of sp3 
hybridisation. In NH3, the valence shell (outer) 
electronic configuration of nitrogen in the 
ground state is 2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
S
p
p
p
x
y
z  having three 
unpaired electrons in the sp3 hybrid orbitals 
and a lone pair of electrons is present in the 
fourth one. These three hybrid orbitals overlap 
with 1s orbitals of hydrogen atoms to form 
three N–H sigma bonds. We know that the 
force of repulsion between a lone pair and a 
bond pair is more than the force of repulsion 
between two bond pairs of electrons. The 
molecule thus gets distorted and the bond 
angle is reduced to 107° from 109.5°. The 
geometry of such a molecule will be pyramidal 
as shown in Fig. 4.13.
Fig.4.13   Formation of NH3 molecule
In case of H2O molecule, the four oxygen 
orbitals (one 2s and three 2p) undergo sp3 
hybridisation forming four sp3 hybrid orbitals 
out of which two contain one electron each and 
the other two contain a pair of electrons. These 
four sp3 hybrid orbitals acquire a tetrahedral 
geometry, with two corners occupied by 
hydrogen atoms while the other two by the 
lone pairs. The bond angle in this case is 
reduced to 104.5° from 109.5° (Fig. 4.14) 
and the molecule thus acquires  a V-shape or 
angular geometry.
Fig.4.14  Formation of H2O molecule
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 24 :
 123
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
4.6.2	 Other Examples of sp3, sp2 and sp 
Hybridisation 
sp3 Hybridisation in C2H6 molecule: In 
ethane molecule both the carbon atoms 
assume sp3 hybrid state. One of the four 
sp3 hybrid orbitals of carbon atom overlaps 
axially with similar orbitals of other atom to 
form sp3-sp3 sigma bond while the other three 
hybrid orbitals of each carbon atom are used 
in forming sp3–s sigma bonds with hydrogen 
atoms as discussed in section 4.6.1(iii). 
Therefore in ethane C–C bond length is 154 
pm and each C–H bond length is 109 pm.
sp2 Hybridisation in C2H4: In the formation 
of ethene molecule, one of the sp2 hybrid 
orbitals of carbon atom overlaps axially with 
sp2 hybridised orbital of another carbon atom 
to form C–C sigma bond. While the other two 
sp2 hybrid orbitals of each carbon atom are 
used for making sp2–s sigma bond with two 
hydrogen atoms. The unhybridised orbital (2px 
or 2py) of one carbon atom overlaps sidewise 
with the similar orbital of the other carbon 
atom to form weak π bond, which consists of 
two equal electron clouds distributed above 
and below the plane of carbon and hydrogen 
atoms. 
Thus, in ethene molecule, the carbon-
carbon bond consists of one sp2–sp2 sigma 
bond and one pi (π ) bond between p orbitals 
which are not used in the hybridisation and 
are perpendicular to the plane of molecule; the 
bond length 134 pm. The C–H bond is sp2–s 
sigma with bond length 108 pm. The H–C–H 
bond angle is 117.6° while the H–C–C angle 
is 121°. The formation of sigma and pi bonds 
in ethene is shown in Fig. 4.15.
Fig. 4.15  Formation of sigma and pi bonds in ethene
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 25 :
 124
chemistry
sp Hybridisation  in C2H2 : In the formation 
of ethyne molecule, both the carbon atoms 
undergo sp-hybridisation having two 
unhybridised orbital i.e., 2py and 2px.
One sp hybrid orbital of one carbon atom 
overlaps axially with sp hybrid orbital of the 
other carbon atom to form C–C sigma bond, 
while the other hybridised orbital of each 
carbon atom overlaps axially with the half 
filled s orbital of hydrogen atoms forming 
σ bonds. Each of the two unhybridised p 
orbitals of both the carbon atoms overlaps 
sidewise to form two π bonds between the 
carbon atoms. So the triple bond between the 
two carbon atoms is made up of one sigma 
and two pi bonds as shown in Fig. 4.16.
4.6.3	 Hybridisation of Elements 
involving d Orbitals 
The elements present in the third period 
contain d orbitals in addition to s and p 
orbitals. The energy of the 3d orbitals are 
comparable to the energy of the 3s and 3p 
orbitals. The energy of 3d orbitals are also 
comparable to those of 4s and 4p orbitals. 
As a consequence the hybridisation involving 
either 3s, 3p and 3d or 3d, 4s and 4p is 
possible. However, since the difference in 
energies of 3p and 4s orbitals is significant, no 
hybridisation involving 3p, 3d and 4s orbitals 
is possible.
The important hybridisation schemes 
involving s, p and d orbitals are summarised 
below:
Fig.4.16	
Formation of sigma and pi bonds in 
ethyne
(i) Formation of PCl5 (sp3d hybridisation): 
The ground state and the excited state outer 
electronic configurations of phosphorus 
(Z=15) are represented below. 
sp3d hybrid orbitals filled by electron pairs 
donated by five Cl atoms.
Shape of 
molecules/ 
ions
Hybridisation 
type
Atomic 
orbitals
Examples
Square 
planar
dsp2
d+s+p(2)
[Ni(CN)4]2–, 
[Pt(Cl)4]2–
Trigonal 
bipyramidal
sp3d
s+p(3)+d
PF5, PCl5
Square 
pyramidal
sp3d2
s+p(3)+d(2)
BrF5
Octahedral
sp3d2
d2sp3
s+p(3)+d(2) 
d(2)+s+p(3)
SF6, [CrF6]3–
[Co(NH3)6]3+
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 26 :
 125
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
Now the five orbitals (i.e., one s, three 
p and one d orbitals) are available for 
hybridisation to yield a set of five sp3d hybrid 
orbitals which are directed towards the five 
corners of a trigonal bipyramidal as depicted 
in the Fig. 4.17.
Fig. 4.17	 Trigonal bipyramidal geometry of PCl5 
molecule
It should be noted that all the bond angles 
in trigonal bipyramidal geometry are not 
equivalent. In PCl5 the five sp3d orbitals of 
phosphorus overlap with the singly occupied 
p orbitals of chlorine atoms to form five P–Cl 
sigma bonds. Three P–Cl bond lie in one 
plane and make an angle of 120° with each 
other; these bonds are termed as equatorial 
bonds. The remaining two P–Cl bonds–one 
lying above and the other lying below the 
equatorial plane, make an angle of 90° with 
the plane. These bonds are called axial bonds. 
As the axial bond pairs suffer more repulsive 
interaction from the equatorial bond pairs, 
therefore axial bonds have been found to 
be slightly longer and hence slightly weaker 
than the equatorial bonds; which makes PCl5 
molecule more reactive.
(ii) Formation of SF6 (sp3d2 hybridisation): 
In SF6 the central sulphur atom has the 
ground state outer electronic configuration 
3s23p4. In the exited state the available six 
orbitals i.e., one s, three p and two d are 
singly occupied by electrons. These orbitals 
hybridise to form six new sp3d2 hybrid 
orbitals, which are projected towards the six 
corners of a regular octahedron in SF6. These 
six sp3d2 hybrid orbitals overlap with singly 
occupied orbitals of fluorine atoms to form 
six S–F sigma bonds. Thus SF6 molecule has 
a regular octahedral geometry as shown in 
Fig. 4.18.
sp3d2 hybridisation
4.7	
Molecular Orbital Theory 
Molecular orbital (MO) theory was developed 
by F. Hund and R.S. Mulliken in 1932. The 
salient features of this theory are :
(i) 
The electrons in a molecule are present 
in the various molecular orbitals as the 
electrons of atoms are present in the 
various atomic orbitals.
(ii) 
The atomic orbitals of comparable 
energies and proper symmetry combine 
to form molecular orbitals.
(iii) While an electron in an atomic orbital 
is influenced by one nucleus, in a 
molecular orbital it is influenced by 
two or more nuclei depending upon the 
number of atoms in the molecule. Thus, 
Fig. 4.18  Octahedral geometry of SF6 molecule
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 27 :
 126
chemistry
an atomic orbital is monocentric while 
a molecular orbital is polycentric.
(iv) 
The number of molecular orbital formed 
is equal to the number of combining 
atomic orbitals. When two atomic 
orbitals combine, two molecular orbitals 
are formed. One is known as bonding 
molecular orbital while the other is 
called antibonding molecular orbital.
(v) 
The bonding molecular orbital has 
lower energy and hence greater stability 
than the corresponding antibonding 
molecular orbital.
(vi) 
Just as the electron probability 
distribution around a nucleus in an 
atom is given by an atomic orbital, the 
electron probability distribution around 
a group of nuclei in a molecule is given 
by a molecular orbital.
(vii) The molecular orbitals like atomic 
orbitals are filled in accordance with 
the aufbau principle obeying the Pauli’s 
exclusion principle and the Hund’s rule.
4.7.1	 Formation of Molecular Orbitals 
Linear 
Combination 
of 
Atomic 
Orbitals (LCAO)
According to wave mechanics, the atomic 
orbitals can be expressed by wave functions 
(ψ ’s) which represent the amplitude of the 
electron waves. These are obtained from 
the solution of Schrödinger wave equation. 
However, since it cannot be solved for any 
system containing more than one electron, 
molecular orbitals which are one electron 
wave functions for molecules are difficult 
to obtain directly from the solution of 
Schrödinger wave equation. To overcome 
this problem, an approximate method known 
as linear combination of atomic orbitals 
(LCAO) has been adopted. 
Let us apply this method to the 
homonuclear diatomic hydrogen molecule. 
Consider the hydrogen molecule consisting 
of two atoms A and B. Each hydrogen atom 
in the ground state has one electron in 1s 
orbital. The atomic orbitals of these atoms 
may be represented by the wave functions 
ψA and ψB. Mathematically, the formation of 
molecular orbitals may be described by the 
linear combination of atomic orbitals that can 
take place by addition and by subtraction of 
wave functions of individual atomic orbitals 
as shown below :
ψMO = ψA + ψB
Therefore, the two molecular orbitals  
σ and σ* are formed as :
	
σ   =  ψA + ψB
	
σ* =  ψA – ψB
The molecular orbital σ formed by the 
addition of atomic orbitals is called the bonding 
molecular orbital while the molecular orbital 
σ* formed by the subtraction of atomic orbital 
is called antibonding molecular orbital as 
depicted in Fig. 4.19.
Fig.4.19	
Formation of bonding (σ) and antibonding 
(σ*) molecular orbitals by the linear 
combination of atomic orbitals ψA and 
ψB centered on two atoms A and B 
respectively.
Qualitatively, the formation of molecular 
orbitals can be understood in terms of the 
constructive or destructive interference of the 
electron waves of the combining atoms. In the 
formation of bonding molecular orbital, the 
two electron waves of the bonding atoms 
reinforce each other due to constructive 
interference while in the formation of 
σ* = ψA – ψB
ψA
ψB
σ  = ψA + ψB
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 28 :
 127
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
antibonding molecular orbital, the electron 
waves cancel each other due to destructive 
interference. As a result, the electron density in 
a bonding molecular orbital is located between 
the nuclei of the bonded atoms because of 
which the repulsion between the nuclei is very 
less while in case of an antibonding molecular 
orbital, most of the electron density is located 
away from the space between the nuclei. 
Infact, there is a nodal plane (on which the 
electron density is zero) between the nuclei 
and hence the repulsion between the nuclei is 
high. Electrons placed in a bonding molecular 
orbital tend to hold the nuclei together and 
stabilise a molecule. Therefore, a bonding 
molecular orbital always possesses lower 
energy than either of the atomic orbitals that 
have combined to form it. In contrast, the 
electrons placed in the antibonding molecular 
orbital destabilise the molecule. This is 
because the mutual repulsion of the electrons 
in this orbital is more than the attraction 
between the electrons and the nuclei, which 
causes a net increase in energy.
It may be noted that the energy of the 
antibonding orbital is raised above the 
energy of the parent atomic orbitals that 
have combined and the energy of the bonding 
orbital has been lowered than the parent 
orbitals. The total energy of two molecular 
orbitals, however, remains the same as that 
of two original atomic orbitals. 
4.7.2	 Conditions for the Combination of 
Atomic Orbitals
The linear combination of atomic orbitals to 
form molecular orbitals takes place only if the 
following conditions are satisfied:
1.	The combining atomic orbitals must 
have the same or nearly the same energy. 
This means that 1s orbital can combine with 
another 1s orbital but not with 2s orbital 
because the energy of 2s orbital is appreciably 
higher than that of 1s orbital. This is not true 
if the atoms are very different.
2.	The combining atomic orbitals must 
have the same symmetry about the 
molecular axis. By convention z-axis is taken 
as the molecular axis. It is important to note 
that atomic orbitals having same or nearly 
the same energy will not combine if they do 
not have the same symmetry. For example, 
2pz orbital of one atom can combine with 2pz 
orbital of the other atom but not with the 
2px or 2py orbitals because of their different 
symmetries. 
3.	The combining atomic orbitals  must 
overlap to the maximum extent. Greater 
the extent of overlap, the greater will be the 
electron-density between the nuclei of a 
molecular orbital.
4.7.3	 Types of Molecular Orbitals
Molecular orbitals of diatomic molecules are 
designated as σ (sigma), π (pi), δ (delta), etc.
In this nomenclature, the sigma ( ) 
molecular orbitals are symmetrical around 
the bond-axis while pi ( ) molecular orbitals 
are not symmetrical. For example, the linear 
combination of 1s orbitals centered on two 
nuclei produces two molecular orbitals which 
are symmetrical around the bond-axis. Such 
molecular orbitals are of the σ type and are 
designated as σ1s and σ*1s [Fig. 4.20(a), page 
124]. If internuclear axis is taken to be in 
the z-direction, it can be seen that a linear 
combination of 2pz- orbitals of two atoms 
also produces two sigma molecular orbitals 
designated as 2pz and *2pz. [Fig. 4.20(b)]
Molecular orbitals obtained from 2px and 
2py orbitals are not symmetrical around the 
bond axis because of the presence of positive 
lobes above and negative lobes below the 
molecular plane. Such molecular orbitals, 
are labelled as π and =π * [Fig. 4.20(c)]. A 
π bonding MO has larger electron density 
above and below the inter-nuclear axis. The 
π* antibonding MO has a node between the 
nuclei.
4.7.4	 Energy Level Diagram for Molecular 
Orbitals
We have seen that 1s atomic orbitals on two 
atoms form two molecular orbitals designated 
as σ1s and σ*1s. In the same manner, the 2s 
and 2p atomic orbitals (eight atomic orbitals 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 29 :
 128
chemistry
Fig. 4.20	 Contours and energies of bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals formed through 
combinations of (a) 1s atomic orbitals; (b) 2pz atomic orbitals and (c) 2px atomic orbitals.
on two atoms) give rise to the following eight 
molecular orbitals:
Antibonding
MOs σ∗2s σ∗2pz π∗2px π∗2py
Bonding
MOs
σ2s
σ2pz
π2px
π2py
The energy levels of these molecular 
orbitals have been determined experimentally 
from spectroscopic data for homonuclear 
diatomic molecules of second row elements 
of the periodic table. The increasing order of 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 30 :
 129
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
energies of various molecular orbitals for O2 
and F2 is given below:
1s <  ∗1s <  2s <  ∗2s < 2pz < (π 2px=π 2py)
< (π ∗2px= π∗ 2py) <  ∗2pz
However, this sequence of energy levels 
of molecular orbitals is not correct for the 
remaining molecules Li2, Be2, B2, C2, N2. For 
instance, it has been observed experimentally 
that  for  molecules such as B2, C2, N2, etc. 
the increasing order of energies of various 
molecular orbitals is 
1s <  ∗1s < 2s <  ∗2s  < (π 2 px = π 2 py)
< 2pz < (π ∗2px =π∗2py) <  ∗2pz
The important characteristic feature 
of this order is that the energy of 
2pz 
molecular orbital is higher than that 
of 2px and 2py molecular orbitals. 
4.7.5	 Electronic Configuration and 
Molecular Behaviour
The distribution of electrons among various 
molecular orbitals is called the electronic 
configuration of the molecule. From the 
electronic configuration of the molecule, it is 
possible to get important information about 
the molecule as discussed below.
Stability of Molecules:  If Nb is the number 
of electrons occupying  bonding orbitals and 
Na the number occupying the antibonding 
orbitals, then
(i) 
the molecule is stable if Nb is greater 
than Na, and
(ii) 
the molecule is unstable if Nb is less  
than Na.
In (i) more bonding orbitals are occupied 
and so the bonding influence is stronger and a 
stable molecule results. In (ii) the antibonding 
influence is stronger and therefore the 
molecule is unstable.
Bond order
Bond order (b.o.) is defined as one half the 
difference between the number of electrons 
present in the bonding and the antibonding 
orbitals i.e.,
Bond order (b.o.) = ½ (Nb–Na)
The rules discussed above regarding the 
stability of the molecule can be restated in 
terms of bond order as follows: A positive bond 
order (i.e., Nb > Na) means a stable molecule 
while a negative (i.e., Nb<Na) or zero (i.e., 
Nb = Na) bond order means an unstable 
molecule.
Nature of the bond  
Integral bond order values of 1, 2 or 3 
correspond to single, double or triple bonds 
respectively as studied in the classical 
concept. 
Bond-length  
The bond order between two atoms in a 
molecule may be taken as an approximate 
measure of the bond length. The bond length 
decreases as bond order increases.
Magnetic nature 
If all the molecular orbitals in a molecule are 
doubly occupied, the substance is diamagnetic 
(repelled by magnetic field). However if one or 
more molecular orbitals are singly occupied it 
is paramagnetic (attracted by magnetic field), 
e.g., O2 molecule.
4.8	
BONDING IN SOME HOMONUCLEAR 
DIATOMIC MOLECULES
In this section we shall discuss bonding in 
some homonuclear diatomic molecules.
1.  Hydrogen molecule (H2 ): It is formed by 
the combination of two hydrogen atoms. Each 
hydrogen atom has one electron in 1s orbital. 
Therefore, in all there are two electrons in 
hydrogen molecule which are present in σ1s 
molecular orbital. So electronic configuration 
of hydrogen molecule is 
H2 : (σ1s)2
The bond order of H2 molecule can be 
calculated as given below:
Bond order = 
N
N
b
a




2
2
0
2
1
This means that the two hydrogen atoms 
are bonded together by a single covalent bond. 
The bond dissociation energy of hydrogen 
molecule has been found to be 438 kJ mol–1 
and bond length equal to 74 pm. Since no 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 31 :
 130
chemistry
unpaired electron is present in hydrogen 
molecule, therefore, it is diamagnetic.
2. Helium molecule (He2 ): The electronic 
configuration of helium atom is 1s2. Each 
helium atom contains 2 electrons, therefore, 
in He2 molecule there would be 4 electrons. 
These electrons will be accommodated in 
σ1s and σ*1s molecular orbitals leading to 
electronic configuration:
He2
 : (σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2
Bond order of He2
 is ½(2 – 2) = 0
He2 molecule is therefore unstable and 
does not exist. 
Similarly, it can be shown that Be2 molecule 
(σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2 (σ2s)2 (σ*2s)2 also does not exist.
3. Lithium molecule (Li2 ): The electronic 
configuration of lithium is 1s2, 2s1. There 
are six electrons in Li2. The electronic 
configuration of Li2 molecule, therefore, is
Li2 : (σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2 (σ2s)2
The above configuration is also written 
as KK(σ2s)2 where KK represents the closed 
K shell structure (σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2.
From the electronic configuration of Li2 
molecule it is clear that there are four electrons 
present in bonding molecular orbitals and two 
electrons present in antibonding molecular 
orbitals. Its bond order, therefore, is ½ (4 – 
2) = 1. It means that Li2 molecule is stable 
and since it has no unpaired electrons it 
should be diamagnetic.  Indeed diamagnetic 
Li2 molecules are known to exist in the 
vapour phase.
4. Carbon molecule (C2 ): The electronic 
configuration of carbon is 1s2 2s2 2p2. There 
are twelve electrons in C2. The electronic 
configuration of C2 molecule, therefore, is
C2 : (1s)2 ( ∗1s)2 ( ∗ 2s)2 (π2p2
x  = π2p2
y)
or KK (2s)2 ( ∗ 2s)2 (π2p2
x  = π2p2
y)
The bond order of C2 is ½ (8 – 4) = 2 
and C2 should be diamagnetic. Diamagnetic 
C2 molecules have indeed been detected in 
vapour phase. It is important to note that 
double bond in C2 consists of both pi bonds 
because of the presence of four electrons in 
two pi molecular orbitals. In most of the other 
molecules a double bond is made up of a 
sigma bond and a pi bond. In a similar fashion 
the bonding in N2 molecule can be discussed.
5. Oxygen molecule (O2 ): The electronic 
configuration of oxygen atom is 1s2 2s2 2p4. 
Each oxygen atom has 8 electrons, hence, 
in O2 molecule there are 16 electrons. The 
electronic configuration of O2 molecule, 
therefore, is
O2 : (1s)2 ( ∗1s)2 ( 2s)2 ( ∗ 2s)2 (2pz)2 
(π2px
2  ≡ π2py
2) (π∗2p1
x  ≡ π ∗2py
1)
O2 : 
From the electronic configuration of O2 
molecule it is clear that ten electrons are 
present in bonding molecular orbitals and six 
electrons are present in antibonding molecular 
orbitals. Its bond order, therefore, is
Bond order = 
 [Nb – Na] = 
 [10 – 6] =2
So in oxygen molecule, atoms are held 
by a double bond. Moreover, it may be noted 
that it contains two unpaired electrons in  
π ∗2px and π ∗2py molecular  orbitals, therefore, 
O2 molecule should be paramagnetic, 
a prediction that corresponds to 
experimental observation. In this way, the 
theory successfully explains the paramagnetic 
nature of oxygen. 
Similarly, the electronic configurations 
of other homonuclear diatomic molecules of 
the second row of the periodic table can be 
written. In Fig. 4.21 are given the molecular 
orbital occupancy and molecular properties 
for B2 through Ne2. The sequence of MOs and 
their electron population are shown. The bond 
energy, bond length, bond order, magnetic 
properties and valence electron configuration 
appear below the orbital diagrams.
[ ]
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 32 :
 131
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
4.9 Hydrogen Bonding 
Nitrogen, oxygen and fluorine are the highly 
electronegative elements. When they are 
attached to a hydrogen atom to form covalent 
bond, the electrons of the covalent bond are 
shifted towards the more electronegative 
atom. This partially positively charged 
hydrogen atom forms a bond with the other 
more electronegative atom. This bond is 
known as hydrogen bond and is weaker 
than the covalent bond. For example, in HF 
molecule, the hydrogen bond exists between 
hydrogen atom of one molecule and fluorine 
atom of another molecule as depicted below :
– – – Hδ+–Fδ– – – –Hδ+ – Fδ– – – – Hδ+ – Fδ–
Here, hydrogen bond acts as a bridge between 
two atoms which holds one atom by covalent 
bond and the other by hydrogen bond. 
Hydrogen bond is represented by a dotted 
line (– – –) while a solid line represents the 
covalent bond. Thus, hydrogen bond can be 
defined as the attractive force which binds 
hydrogen atom of one molecule with the 
electronegative atom (F, O or N) of another 
molecule.
4.9.1	 Cause of Formation of Hydrogen 
Bond 
When hydrogen is bonded to strongly 
electronegative element ‘X’, the electron pair 
shared between the two atoms moves far 
away from hydrogen atom. As a result the 
hydrogen atom becomes highly electropositive 
with respect to the other atom ‘X’. Since 
there is displacement of electrons towards 
X, the hydrogen acquires fractional positive 
charge (δ +) while ‘X’ attain fractional negative 
Fig. 4.21  MO occupancy and molecular properties for B2 through Ne2.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 33 :
 132
chemistry
SUMMARY
Kössel’s first insight into the mechanism of formation of electropositive and electronegative 
ions related the process to the attainment of noble gas configurations by the respective ions. 
Electrostatic attraction between ions is the cause for their stability. This gives the concept 
of electrovalency.
The first description of covalent bonding was provided by Lewis in terms of the sharing 
of electron pairs between atoms and he related the process to the attainment of noble gas 
configurations by reacting atoms as a result of sharing of electrons. The Lewis dot symbols 
show the number of valence electrons of the atoms of a given element and Lewis dot structures 
show pictorial representations of bonding in molecules. 
An ionic compound is pictured as a three-dimensional aggregation of positive and negative 
ions in an ordered arrangement called the crystal lattice. In a crystalline solid there is a 
charge balance between the positive and negative ions. The crystal lattice is stabilized by 
the enthalpy of lattice formation. 
While a single covalent bond is formed by sharing of an electron pair between two atoms, 
multiple bonds result from the sharing of two or three electron pairs. Some bonded atoms 
have additional pairs of electrons not involved in bonding. These are called lone-pairs of 
electrons. A Lewis dot structure shows the arrangement of bonded pairs and lone pairs around 
each atom in a molecule. Important parameters, associated with chemical bonds, like: 
bond length, bond angle, bond enthalpy, bond order and bond polarity have significant 
effect on the properties of compounds.
A number of molecules and polyatomic ions cannot be described accurately by a single 
Lewis structure and a number of descriptions (representations) based on the same skeletal 
structure are written and these taken together represent the molecule or ion. This is a very 
important and extremely useful concept called resonance. The contributing structures 
or canonical forms taken together constitute the resonance hybrid which represents the 
molecule or ion.
charge (δ–). This results in the formation of a 
polar molecule having electrostatic force of 
attraction which can be represented as:
Hδ+ – Xδ– – – – Hδ+ – Xδ– – – – Hδ+ – Xδ–
The magnitude of H-bonding depends 
on the physical state of the compound. It is 
maximum in the solid state and minimum in 
the gaseous state. Thus, the hydrogen bonds 
have strong influence on the structure and 
properties of the compounds.
4.9.2	 Types of H-Bonds
There are two types of H-bonds
(i) 
Intermolecular hydrogen bond
(ii) 
Intramolecular hydrogen bond
(1) Intermolecular hydrogen bond : It is 
formed between two different molecules of the 
same or different compounds. For example, 
H-bond in case of HF molecule, alcohol or 
water molecules, etc.
(2) Intramolecular hydrogen bond : It is 
formed when hydrogen atom is in between 
the two highly electronegative (F, O, N) 
atoms present within the same molecule. For 
example, in o-nitrophenol the hydrogen is in 
between the two oxygen atoms.
Fig. 4.22	 Intramolecular hydrogen bonding in  
o-nitrophenol molecule
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 34 :
 133
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
The VSEPR model used for predicting the geometrical shapes of molecules is based on 
the assumption that electron pairs repel each other and, therefore, tend to remain as far 
apart as possible. According to this model, molecular geometry is determined by repulsions 
between lone pairs and lone pairs; lone pairs and bonding pairs and bonding pairs and bonding 
pairs. The order of these repulsions being : lp-lp > lp-bp > bp-bp
The valence bond (VB) approach to covalent bonding is basically concerned with the 
energetics of covalent bond formation about which the Lewis and VSEPR models are silent. 
Basically the VB theory discusses bond formation  in terms of overlap of orbitals. For example 
the formation of the H2 molecule from two hydrogen atoms involves the overlap of the 1s 
orbitals of the two H atoms which are singly occupied. It is seen that the potential energy 
of the system gets lowered as the two H atoms come near to each other. At the equilibrium 
inter-nuclear distance (bond distance) the energy touches a minimum. Any attempt to bring 
the nuclei still closer results in a sudden increase in energy and consequent destabilization 
of the molecule. Because of orbital overlap the electron density between the nuclei increases 
which helps in bringing them closer. It is however seen that the actual bond enthalpy and 
bond length values are not obtained by overlap alone and other variables have to be taken 
into account. 
For explaining the characteristic shapes of polyatomic molecules Pauling introduced the 
concept of hybridisation of atomic orbitals. sp, sp2, sp3 hybridizations of atomic orbitals 
of Be, B, C, N and O are used to explain the formation and geometrical shapes of molecules 
like BeCl2, BCl3, CH4, NH3 and H2O. They also explain the formation of multiple bonds in 
molecules like C2H2 and C2H4.  
The molecular orbital (MO) theory describes bonding in terms of the combination and 
arrangment of atomic orbitals to form molecular orbitals that are associated with the molecule 
as a whole. The number of molecular orbitals are always equal to the number of atomic 
orbitals from which they are formed. Bonding molecular orbitals increase electron density 
between the nuclei and are lower in energy than the individual atomic orbitals. Antibonding 
molecular orbitals have a region of zero electron density between the nuclei and have more 
energy than the individual atomic orbitals.
The electronic configuration of the molecules is written by filling electrons in the molecular 
orbitals in the order of increasing energy levels. As in the case of atoms, the Pauli exclusion 
principle and Hund’s rule are applicable for the filling of molecular orbitals. Molecules are 
said to be stable if the number of elctrons in bonding molecular orbitals is greater than that 
in antibonding molecular orbitals.
Hydrogen bond is formed when a hydrogen atom finds itself between two highly 
electronegative atoms such as F, O and N. It may be intermolecular (existing between two 
or more molecules of the same or different substances) or intramolecular (present within 
the same molecule). Hydrogen bonds have a powerful effect on the structure and properties 
of many compounds.
EXERCISES
4.1 
Explain the formation of a chemical bond.
4.2 
Write Lewis dot symbols for atoms of the following elements : Mg, Na, B, O, N, Br.
4.3 
Write Lewis symbols for the following atoms and ions:
 
S and S2–; Al and Al3+; H and H–
4.4 
Draw the Lewis structures for the following molecules and ions :
 
H2S, SiCl4, BeF2, CO3
2−, HCOOH
4.5 
Define octet rule. Write its significance and limitations.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 35 :
 134
chemistry
4.6 
Write the favourable factors for the formation of ionic bond.
4.7 
Discuss the shape of the following molecules using the VSEPR model:
 
BeCl2, BCl3, SiCl4, AsF5, H2S, PH3	
4.8 
Although geometries of NH3 and H2O molecules are distorted tetrahedral, bond angle 
in water is less than that of ammonia. Discuss.
4.9 
How do you express the bond strength in terms of bond order ?
4.10 
Define the bond length.
4.11 
Explain the important aspects of resonance with reference to the CO3
2− ion.
4.12 
H3PO3 can be represented by structures 1 and 2 shown below. Can these two 
structures be taken as the canonical forms of the resonance hybrid representing 
H3PO3 ? If not, give reasons for the same.
4.13 
Write the resonance structures for SO3, NO2 and NO3
−.
4.14 
Use Lewis symbols to show electron transfer between the following atoms to form 
cations and anions : (a) K and S  (b) Ca and O (c) Al and N.
4.15 
Although both CO2 and H2O are triatomic molecules, the shape of H2O molecule is 
bent while that of CO2 is linear. Explain this on the basis of dipole moment.
4.16 
Write the significance/applications of dipole moment.
4.17 
Define electronegativity. How does it differ from electron gain enthalpy ?
4.18 
Explain with the help of suitable example polar covalent bond.
4.19 
Arrange the bonds in order of increasing ionic character in the molecules: LiF, K2O, 
N2, SO2 and ClF3. 
4.20 
The skeletal structure of CH3COOH as shown below is correct, but some of the bonds 
are shown incorrectly. Write the correct Lewis structure for acetic acid.
	
4.21 
Apart from tetrahedral geometry, another possible geometry for CH4 is square planar 
with the four H atoms at the corners of the square and the C atom at its centre. 
Explain why CH4 is not square planar ?
4.22 
Explain why BeH2 molecule has a zero dipole moment although the Be–H bonds are 
polar.
4.23 
Which out of NH3 and NF3 has higher dipole moment and why ?
4.24 
What is meant by hybridisation of atomic orbitals? Describe the shapes of sp, sp2, 
sp3 hybrid orbitals.
4.25 
Describe the change in hybridisation (if any) of the Al atom in the following reaction.
	
AlCl
Cl
AlCl
3
4




2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 36 :
 135
Chemical Bonding And Molecular Structure
4.26 
Is there any change in the hybridisation of B and N atoms as a result of the following 
reaction?
	
4.27 
Draw diagrams showing the formation of a double bond and a triple bond between 
carbon atoms in C2H4 and C2H2 molecules.
4.28 
What is the total number of sigma and pi bonds in the following molecules?
 
(a) C2H2  (b)  C2H4
4.29 
Considering x-axis as the internuclear axis which out of the following will 
not form a sigma bond and why?  (a) 1s and 1s (b) 1s and 2px; (c) 2py and 2py 
(d) 1s and 2s.
4.30 
Which hybrid orbitals are used by carbon atoms in the following molecules?
 
CH3–CH3; (b) CH3–CH=CH2; (c) CH3-CH2-OH; (d) CH3-CHO (e) CH3COOH
4.31 
What do you understand by bond pairs and lone pairs of electrons? Illustrate by 
giving one exmaple of each type.
4.32 
Distinguish between a sigma and a pi bond.
4.33 
Explain the formation of H2 molecule on the basis of valence bond theory.
4.34 
Write the important conditions required for the linear combination of atomic orbitals 
to form molecular orbitals.
4.35 
Use molecular orbital theory to explain why the Be2 molecule does not exist.
4.36 
Compare the relative stability of the following species and indicate their magnetic 
properties;
	
 (superoxide), O2
2− (peroxide)
4.37 
Write the significance of a plus and a minus sign shown in representing the orbitals.
4.38 
Describe the hybridisation in case of PCl5. Why are the axial bonds longer as compared 
to equatorial bonds?
4.39 
Define hydrogen bond. Is it weaker or stronger than the van der Waals forces?
4.40 
What is meant by the term bond order? Calculate the bond order of : N2, O2, O2
+ 
 and O2
–.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 1 :
 Thermodynamics
It is the only physical theory of universal content concerning 
which I am convinced that, within the framework of the 
applicability of its basic concepts, it will never be overthrown.
Albert Einstein
Chemical energy stored by molecules can be released as 
heat during chemical reactions when a fuel like methane, 
cooking gas or coal burns in air. The chemical energy may 
also be used to do mechanical work when a fuel burns 
in an engine or to provide electrical energy through a 
galvanic cell like dry cell. Thus, various forms of energy 
are interrelated and under certain conditions, these may 
be transformed from one form into  another. The study 
of these energy transformations forms the subject matter 
of thermodynamics. The laws of thermodynamics deal 
with energy changes of macroscopic systems involving 
a large number of molecules rather than microscopic 
systems containing a few molecules. Thermodynamics is 
not concerned about how and at what rate these energy 
transformations are carried out, but is based on initial and 
final states of a system undergoing the change. Laws of 
thermodynamics apply only when a system is in equilibrium 
or moves from one equilibrium state to another equilibrium 
state. Macroscopic properties like pressure and temperature 
do not change with time for a system in equilibrium state. 
In this unit, we would like to answer some of the important 
questions through thermodynamics, like:
How do we determine the energy changes involved in a 
chemical reaction/process? Will it occur or not?
What drives a chemical reaction/process?
To what extent do the chemical reactions proceed? 
Unit 5
After studying this Unit, you will be 
able to
•	
explain the terms : system and 
surroundings;
•	
discriminate between close, open 
and isolated systems;
•	
explain internal energy, work and 
heat;
•	
state first law of thermodynamics 
and express it mathematically;
•	
calculate energy changes as 
work and heat contributions in 
chemical systems;
•	
explain state functions: U, H. 
•	
correlate  ∆U and ∆H;
•	
measure experimentally ∆U and 
∆H;
•	
define standard states for ∆H;
•	
calculate enthalpy changes for 
various types of reactions; 
•	
state and apply Hess’s law of 
constant heat summation;
•	
differentiate between extensive 
and intensive properties;
•	
define spontaneous and non-
spontaneous processes;
•	
e x p l a i n  e n t r o p y  a s  a 
thermodynamic state function 
and apply it for spontaneity;
•	
explain Gibbs energy change (∆G); 
and
•	
establish relationship between 
∆G and spontaneity, ∆G and 
equilibrium constant.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 2 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 137
5.1  Thermodynamic terms
We are interested in chemical reactions and 
the energy changes accompanying them. For 
this we need to know certain thermodynamic 
terms. These are discussed below. 
5.1.1	 The System and the Surroundings
A system in thermodynamics refers to that 
part of universe in which observations are 
made and remaining universe constitutes 
the surroundings. The surroundings include 
everything other than the system. System 
and the surroundings together constitute the 
universe. 
The universe = The system + The surroundings
However, the entire universe other than 
the system is not affected by the changes 
taking place in the system. Therefore, for all 
practical purposes, the surroundings are that 
portion of the remaining universe which can 
interact with the system. Usually, the region 
of space in the neighbourhood of the system 
constitutes its surroundings.
For example, if we are studying the 
reaction between two substances A and B 
kept in a beaker, the beaker containing the 
reaction mixture is the system and the room 
where the beaker is kept is the surroundings 
(Fig. 5.1). 
Fig. 5.1  System and the surroundings
the system from the surroundings is called 
boundary. This is designed to allow us to 
control and keep track of all movements of 
matter and energy in or out of the system.  
5.1.2 Types of the System
We, further classify the systems according 
to the movements of matter and energy in or 
out of the system.
1.	 Open System
In an open system, there is exchange of energy 
and matter between system and surroundings 
[Fig. 5.2 (a)]. The presence of reactants in an 
open beaker is an example of an open system*. 
Here the boundary is an imaginary surface 
enclosing the beaker and reactants.
2.	 Closed System
In a closed system, there is no exchange of 
matter, but exchange of energy is possible 
between system and the surroundings  
[Fig. 5.2 (b)]. The presence of reactants in a 
closed vessel made of conducting material 
e.g., copper or steel is an example of a closed 
system.
Fig. 5.2 	
Open, closed and isolated systems.
Note that the system may be defined 
by physical boundaries, like beaker or test 
tube, or the system may simply be defined 
by a set of Cartesian coordinates specifying 
a particular volume in space. It is necessary 
to think of the system as separated from the 
surroundings by some sort of wall which may 
be real or imaginary. The wall that separates 
*  We could have chosen only the reactants as system then walls of the beakers will act as boundary.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 3 :
 chemIstry
138
3.	 Isolated System
In an isolated system, there is no exchange 
of energy or matter between the system and 
the surroundings [Fig. 5.2 (c)]. The presence 
of reactants in a thermos flask or any other 
closed insulated vessel is an example of an 
isolated system. 
5.1.3	 The State of the System
The system must be described in order to 
make any useful calculations by specifying 
quantitatively each of the properties such as 
its pressure (p), volume (V), and temperature 
(T ) as well as the composition of the system. 
We need to describe the system by specifying 
it before and after the change. You would 
recall from your Physics course that the 
state of a system in mechanics is completely 
specified at a given instant of time, by the 
position and velocity of each mass point of 
the system. In thermodynamics, a different 
and much simpler concept of the state of a 
system is introduced. It does not need detailed 
knowledge of motion of each particle  because, 
we deal with average measurable properties of 
the system. We specify the state of the system 
by state functions or state variables.
The state of a thermodynamic system is 
described by its measurable or macroscopic  
(bulk) properties. We can describe the state 
of a gas by quoting its pressure (p), volume 
(V), temperature (T ), amount (n) etc. Variables 
like p, V, T are called state variables or state 
functions because their values depend only 
on the state of the system and not on how it 
is reached. In order to completely define the 
state of a system it is not necessary to define 
all the properties of the system; as only a 
certain number of properties can be varied 
independently. This number depends on the 
nature of the system. Once these minimum 
number of macroscopic properties are fixed, 
others automatically have definite values.
The state of the surroundings can never 
be completely specified; fortunately it is not 
necessary to do so.
5.1.4	 The Internal Energy as a State 
Function
When we talk about our chemical system 
losing or gaining energy, we need to introduce 
a quantity which represents the total energy 
of the system. It may be chemical, electrical, 
mechanical or any other type of energy you 
may think of, the sum of all these is the energy 
of the system. In thermodynamics, we call it  
the internal energy, U of the system, which 
may change, when
• 
heat passes into or out of the system,
• 
work is done on or by the system,
• 
matter enters or leaves the system. 
These systems are classified accordingly 
as you have already studied in section 5.1.2.
(a)	 Work 
Let us first examine a change in internal energy 
by doing work. We take a system containing 
some quantity of water in a thermos flask 
or in an insulated beaker. This would not 
allow exchange of heat between the system 
and surroundings through its boundary and 
we call this type of system as adiabatic. The 
manner in which the state of such a system 
may be changed will be called adiabatic 
process. Adiabatic process is a process in 
which there is no transfer of heat between 
the system and surroundings. Here, the wall 
separating the system and the surroundings 
is called the adiabatic wall (Fig. 5.3). 
Fig. 5.3	
An adiabatic system which does not 
permit the transfer of heat through its 
boundary.
Let us bring the change in the internal 
energy of the system by doing some work on 
it. Let us call the  initial state of the system 
as state A and its temperature as  TA. Let 
the internal energy of the system in state A 
be called UA. We can change the state of the 
system in two different ways.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 4 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 139
One way: We do some mechanical work, say 
1 kJ, by rotating a set of small paddles and 
thereby churning water. Let the new state 
be called B state and its temperature, as 
TB. It is found that TB > TA and the change 
in temperature, ∆T = TB–TA. Let the internal 
energy of the system in state B be UB and the 
change in internal energy, ∆U =UB– UA.
Second way: We now do an equal amount 
(i.e., 1kJ) electrical work with the help of an 
immersion rod  and note down the temperature 
change. We find that the change in temperature 
is same as in the earlier case, say, TB – TA.
In fact, the experiments in the above 
manner were done by J. P. Joule between 
1840–50 and he was able to show that a 
given amount of work done on the system, 
no matter how it was done (irrespective of 
path) produced the same change of state, as 
measured by the change in the temperature 
of the system. 
So, it seems appropriate to define a 
quantity, the internal energy U, whose value 
is characteristic of the state of a system, 
whereby the adiabatic work, wad required to 
bring about a change of state is equal to the 
difference between the value of U in one state 
and that in another state, ∆U i.e.,
∆U =U2 –U1= wad
Therefore, internal energy, U, of the 
system is a state function. 
By conventions of IUPAC in chemical 
thermodynamics. The positive sign expresses 
that wad  is positive when work is done on the 
system and the internal energy of system 
increases. Similarly, if the work is done by the 
system, wad will be negative because internal 
energy of the system decreases.
Can you name some other familiar state 
functions? Some of other familiar state 
functions are V, p, and  T. For example, if we 
bring a change in temperature of the system 
from 25°C to 35°C, the change in temperature 
is 35°C–25°C = +10°C, whether we go straight 
up to 35°C or we cool the system for a few 
degrees, then take the system to the final 
temperature. Thus, T is a state function and 
the change in temperature is independent of 
the route taken. Volume of water in a pond, for 
example, is a state function, because change 
in volume of its water is independent of the 
route by which water is filled in the pond, 
either by rain or by tubewell or by both. 
(b)	 Heat
We can also change the internal energy 
of a system by transfer of heat from the 
surroundings to the system or vice-versa 
without expenditure of work. This exchange 
of energy, which is a result of temperature 
difference is called heat, q. Let us consider 
bringing about the same change in temperature 
(the same initial and final states as before 
in section 5.1.4 (a) by transfer of heat 
through thermally conducting walls instead 
of adiabatic walls (Fig. 5.4). 
We take water at temperature, TA in a 
container having thermally conducting walls, 
say made up of copper and enclose it in a 
huge heat reservoir at temperature, TB. The 
heat absorbed by the system (water), q can be 
measured in terms of temperature difference, 
TB – TA. In this case change in internal energy, 
∆U = q, when no work is done at constant 
volume.
By conventions of IUPAC in chemical 
thermodynamics. The  q is positive, when heat 
is transferred from the surroundings to the 
system and the internal energy of the system 
increases and q is negative when heat is 
transferred from system to the surroundings 
resulting in decrease of the internal energy of 
the system. 
*	 Earlier negative sign was assigned when the work is done on the system and positive sign when the work is done by the 
system. This is still followed in physics books, although IUPAC has recommended the use of new sign convention.
Fig. 5.4	
A system which allows heat transfer 
through its boundary.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 5 :
 chemIstry
140
(c)	 The general case
Let us consider the general case in which 
a change of state is brought about both by  
doing work and by transfer of heat. We write 
change in internal energy for this case as:
      ∆U = q  + w	
	
	
        (5.1)
For a given change in state, q and w can 
vary depending on how the change is carried 
out. However, q +w = ∆U will depend only on 
initial and final state. It will be independent 
of the way the change is carried out. If there 
is no transfer of energy as heat or as work 
(isolated system) i.e., if w = 0 and q = 0, then  
∆ U = 0. 
The equation 5.1 i.e., ∆U = q + w is 
mathematical statement of the first law of 
thermodynamics, which states that 
The energy of an isolated system is 
constant. 
It is commonly stated as the law of conservation 
of energy i.e., energy can neither be created 
nor be destroyed.
Note: There is considerable difference between 
the character of the thermodynamic property 
energy and that of a mechanical property such 
as volume. We can specify an unambiguous 
(absolute) value for volume of a system in a 
particular state, but not the absolute value of 
the internal energy. However, we can measure 
only the changes in the internal energy, ∆U 
of the system. 
Problem 5.1
Express the change in internal energy 
of a system when
(i)	 No heat is absorbed by the system 
from the surroundings, but work 
(w) is done on the system. What 
type of wall does the system have ?
(ii)	 No work is done on the system, 
but q  amount of heat is taken out 
from the system and given to the 
surroundings. What type of wall 
does the system have?
(iii)	w amount of work is done by the 
system and q amount of heat is 
supplied to the system. What type 
of system would it be?
Solution 
(i)	 	∆ U = w ad, wall is adiabatic
(ii)	 ∆ U = – q, thermally conducting 
walls 
(iii)	∆ U = q – w, closed system.
5.2	
Applications
Many chemical reactions involve the generation 
of gases capable of doing mechanical work or 
the generation of heat. It is important for us 
to quantify these changes and relate them 
to the changes in the internal energy. Let us 
see how!
5.2.1	 Work
First of all, let us concentrate on the nature of 
work a system can do. We will consider only 
mechanical work i.e., pressure-volume work.
For understanding pressure-volume 
work, let us consider a cylinder which 
contains one mole of an ideal gas fitted with 
a frictionless piston. Total volume of the gas 
is Vi and pressure of the gas inside is p. If 
external pressure is pex which is greater  than 
p, piston is moved inward till the pressure 
Fig. 5.5 (a)	Work done on an ideal gas in a 
cylinder when it is compressed by 
a constant external pressure, pex 
(in single step) is equal to the shaded 
area.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 6 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 141
inside becomes equal to pex. Let this change 
be achieved in a single step and the final 
volume be Vf . During this compression, 
suppose piston moves a distance, l and 
is cross-sectional area of the piston is A  
[Fig. 5.5(a)].
then, volume change = l × A = ∆V = (Vf  – Vi )
We also know, pressure = 
Therefore, force on the piston = pex . A
If  w is the work done on the system by 
movement of the piston then
w = force × distance = pex . A .l 
   = pex . (–∆V) = – pex ∆V = – pex (Vf – Vi )       (5.2)
The negative sign of this expression is 
required to obtain conventional sign for w, 
which will be positive. It indicates that in case 
of compression work is done on the system. 
Here (Vf – Vi ) will be negative and negative 
multiplied by negative will be positive. Hence 
the sign obtained for the work will be positive.
If the pressure is not constant at every 
stage of compression, but changes in number 
of finite steps, work done on the gas will be 
summed over all the steps and will be equal 
to – Σ р ∆V [Fig. 5.5 (b)] 
If the pressure is not constant but 
changes during the process such that it 
is always infinitesimally greater than the 
pressure of the gas, then, at each stage of 
compression, the volume decreases by an 
infinitesimal amount, dV. In such a case we 
can calculate the work done on the gas by the  
relation
 
w p dV
ex
V
V
i
f
                            
     (5.3)
Here, pex at each stage is equal to (pin + dp) 
in case of compression [Fig. 5.5(c)]. In an 
expansion process under similar conditions, 
the external pressure is always less than the 
pressure of the system i.e., pex = (pin– dp). In 
general case we can write, pex = (pin +  dp). Such 
processes are called reversible processes.
A process or change is said to be 
reversible, if a change is brought out in such a 
way that the process could, at any moment, 
be reversed by an infinitesimal change. 
A reversible process proceeds infinitely 
slowly by a series of equilibrium states 
such that system and the surroundings are 
always in near equilibrium with each other. 
Fig. 5.5 (c)	pV-plot when pressure is not constant 
and changes in infinite steps (reversible 
conditions) during compression from 
initial volume, Vi to final volume, Vf . 
Work done on the gas is represented 
by the shaded area. 
Fig. 5.5 (b)	pV-plot when pressure is not constant 
and changes in finite steps during 
compression from initial volume, Vi to 
final volume, Vf . Work done on the gas 
is represented by the shaded area. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 7 :
 chemIstry
142
Processes other than reversible processes 
are known as irreversible processes.
In chemistry, we face problems that can 
be solved if we relate the work term to the 
internal pressure of the system. We can 
relate work to internal pressure of the system 
under reversible conditions by writing 
equation 5.3 as follows:
wrev
ex
V
V
V
V
p dV
p
dp dV
i
f
i
f




(
)
in
Since dp × dV is very small we can write
wrev
V
V
d
i
f
p
V
in
                                (5.4)
Now, the pressure of the gas (pin which we 
can write as p now) can be expressed in terms 
of its volume through gas equation. For n mol 
of an ideal gas i.e., pV =nRT


p
T
V
nR
Therefore, at constant temperature 
(isothermal process), 
 
wrev 

n
n
R
R
T dV
V
T
V
V
f
i
V
V
i
f
ln
= – 2.303 nRT log 
V
V
f
i
	
	
       (5.5)
Free expansion: Expansion of a gas in 
vacuum (pex = 0) is called free expansion. 
No work is done during free expansion of an 
ideal gas whether the process is reversible or 
irreversible (equation 5.2 and 5.3).
Now, we  can write equation 5.1 in number 
of ways depending on the type of processes.
Let us substitute w = – pex∆V (eq. 5.2) in 
equation 5.1, and we get
	
	
 

U
q
p
V
ex


If a process is carried out at constant volume 
(∆V = 0), then 
∆U = qV
the subscript V in qV
 denotes that heat is 
supplied at constant volume.
Isothermal and free expansion of an 
ideal gas
For isothermal (T = constant) expansion of 
an ideal gas into vacuum; w = 0 since pex = 0. 
Also, Joule determined experimentally that  
q = 0; therefore, ∆U = 0
Equation 5.1, 
can be 
expressed for isothermal irreversible and 
reversible changes as follows: 
1.	 For isothermal irreversible change
	
q = – w = pex (Vf – Vi ) 
2.	 For isothermal reversible change 
	
q = – w = nRT ln 
      =  2.303 nRT log 
V
V
f
i
	
For adiabatic change, q = 0, 
	
∆U = wad
Problem 5.2
Two litres of an ideal gas at a pressure of 10 
atm expands isothermally at 25 °C into a 
vacuum until its total volume is 10 litres. 
How much heat is absorbed and how 
much work is done in the expansion ?
Solution
We have  q = – w =  pex (10 – 2) = 0(8) = 0
No work is done; no heat is absorbed.
Problem 5.3
Consider the same expansion, but 
this time against a constant external 
pressure of 1 atm.
Solution
We have  q = – w =  pex (8) = 8 litre-atm
Problem 5.4
Consider the expansion given in problem 
5.2, for 1 mol of an ideal gas conducted 
reversibly.
Solution
We have q = – w =  2.303 nRT log V
V
f
s   
	 = 2.303 × 1 × 0.8206 × 298 × log 10
2
 
	
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 8 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 143
Remember ∆H = qp, heat absorbed by the 
system at constant pressure. 
∆H is negative for exothermic reactions 
which evolve heat during the reaction and 
∆H is positive for endothermic reactions 
which absorb heat from the surroundings. 
At constant volume (∆V = 0), ∆U = qV, 
therefore equation 5.8 becomes 
∆H = ∆U = qV
The difference between  ∆H and ∆U is not 
usually significant for systems consisting 
of only solids and / or liquids. Solids and 
liquids do not suffer any significant volume 
changes upon heating. The difference, 
however, becomes significant when gases are 
involved. Let us consider a reaction involving 
gases. If VA is the total volume of the gaseous 
reactants, VB is the total volume of the gaseous 
products, nA is the number of moles of gaseous 
reactants and nB is the number of moles of 
gaseous products, all at constant pressure 
and temperature, then using the ideal gas 
law, we write,
	
	
pVA = nART
and	
	
pVB = nBRT
Thus,  pVB – pVA = nBRT – nART = (nB–nA)RT 
or	
p (VB – VA) = (nB – nA) RT
or       p ∆V = ∆ngRT	
(5.9)
Here, ∆ng refers to the number of moles of 
gaseous products minus the number of moles 
of gaseous reactants.
Substituting the value of p∆V from 
equation 5.9 in equation 5.8, we get 
∆H = ∆U + ∆ngRT	
(5.10)
The equation 5.10 is useful for calculating 
∆H from ∆U and vice versa. 
Problem 5.5
If water vapour is assumed to be a 
perfect gas, molar enthalpy change for 
vapourisation of 1 mol of water at 1bar 
and 100°C is 41kJ mol–1. Calculate the 
internal energy change, when
= 2.303 x 0.8206 x 298 x log 5
= 2.303 x 0.8206 x 298 x 0.6990
= 393.66 L atm
5.2.2 Enthalpy, H
(a) A Useful New State Function
We know that the heat absorbed at constant 
volume is equal to change in the internal 
energy i.e., ∆U = qV. But most of chemical 
reactions are carried out not at constant 
volume, but in flasks or test tubes under 
constant atmospheric pressure. We need to 
define another state function which may be 
suitable under these conditions. 
We may write equation (5.1) as 
∆U = qp – p∆V at constant pressure, where 
qp  is heat absorbed by the system and –p∆V 
represent expansion work done by the system.
Let us represent the initial state by 
subscript 1 and final state by 2
We can rewrite the above equation as 
U2–U1 = qp – p (V2 – V1)
On rearranging, we get
qp = (U2 + pV2) – (U1 + pV1)	
(5.6)
Now we can define another thermodynamic 
function, the enthalpy H [Greek word 
enthalpien, to warm or heat content] as :
H = U + pV  	
	
(5.7) 
so, equation (5.6) becomes
qp= H2 – H1 = ∆H
Although q is a path dependent function, 
H is a state function because it depends on 
U, p and V, all of which are state functions. 
Therefore, ∆H is independent of path. Hence, 
qp is also independent of path.
For finite changes at constant pressure, 
we can write equation 5.7 as
∆H = ∆U + ∆pV
Since p is constant, we can write 
∆H = ∆U + p∆V	
(5.8)
It is important to note that when heat is 
absorbed by the system at constant pressure, 
we are actually measuring changes in the 
enthalpy.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 9 :
 chemIstry
144
1 mol of water is vapourised at 1 bar 
pressure and 100°C.
Solution
(i)  The change H2O (l) → H2O (g)
∆H = ∆U + ∆ngRT
or ∆U = ∆H – ∆ngRT, substituting the 
values, we get
∆U = 41.00 kJ mol–1 – 1
	
  × 8.3 J mol–1 K–1 × 373 K
= 41.00 kJ mol-1 – 3.096 kJ mol-1
= 37.904 kJ mol–1
(c) Heat Capacity
In this sub-section, let us see how to measure 
heat transferred to a system. This heat 
appears as a rise in temperature of the system 
in case of heat absorbed by the system. 
The increase of temperature is proportional 
to the heat transferred 
q
coeff
T


The magnitude of the coefficient depends 
on the size, composition and nature of the 
system. We can also write it as q = C ∆T
The coefficient, C is called the heat 
capacity. 
Thus, we can measure the heat supplied 
by monitoring the temperature rise, provided 
we know the heat capacity. 
When C is large, a given amount of heat 
results in only a small temperature rise. Water 
has a large heat capacity i.e., a lot of energy 
is needed to raise its temperature. 
C is directly proportional to amount of 
substance. The molar heat capacity of a 
substance, Cm=
C
n



, is the heat capacity 
for one mole of the substance and is 
the quantity of heat needed to raise the 
temperature of one mole by one degree 
celsius (or one kelvin). Specific heat, also 
called specific heat capacity is the quantity 
Fig. 5.6(a)  A gas at volume V and temperature T
Fig. 5.6 (b)	 Partition, each part having half the 
volume of the gas
(b) Extensive and Intensive Properties
In thermodynamics, a distinction is made   
between extensive properties and intensive 
properties. An extensive property is a 
property whose value depends on the quantity 
or size of matter present in the system. For 
example, mass, volume, internal energy, 
enthalpy, heat capacity, etc. are extensive 
properties.
Those properties which do not depend 
on the quantity or size of matter present 
are known as intensive properties. For 
example temperature, density, pressure etc. 
are intensive properties. A molar property, 
χm, is the value of an extensive property χ of 
the system for 1 mol of the substance. If n is 
the amount of matter, 

m n  is independent 
of the amount of matter. Other examples are 
molar volume, Vm and molar heat capacity, 
Cm. Let us understand the distinction 
between extensive and intensive properties by 
considering a gas enclosed in a container of 
volume V and at temperature T [Fig. 5.6(a)]. 
Let us make a partition such that volume 
is halved, each part [Fig. 5.6 (b)] now has 
one half of the original volume, V
2
, but the 
temperature will still remain the same i.e., T. 
It is clear that volume is an extensive property 
and temperature is an intensive property. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 10 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 145
of heat required to raise the temperature of 
one unit mass of a substance by one degree 
celsius (or one kelvin). For finding out the 
heat, q, required to raise the temperatures 
of a sample, we multiply the specific heat 
of the substance, c, by the mass m, and 
temperatures change, ∆T  as
     q
c
m
T
C
T






                   (5.11)
(d) The Relationship between Cp and CV 
 for an Ideal Gas 
At constant volume, the heat capacity, C is 
denoted by CV  and at constant pressure, this 
is denoted by Cp . Let us find the relationship 
between the two.
We can write equation for heat, q
at constant volume as qV = C
T
U
V 


at constant pressure as qp = C
T
H
p


The difference between Cp and CV can be 
derived for an ideal gas as: 
For a mole of an ideal gas, ∆H = ∆U + ∆(pV )
                                          = ∆U + ∆(RT )
	
	
	
	
     = ∆U + R∆T       






H
U
T
R
 	
(5.12)
On putting the values of ∆H and ∆U, 
we have
C
T
C
T
T
p
V




R
C
C
p
V

R
      Cp – CV = R	
	
	
      (5.13)
5.3	
Measurement of ∆U and ∆H: 
Calorimetry
We can measure energy changes associated 
with chemical or physical processes by an 
experimental technique called calorimetry. 
In calorimetry, the process is carried out in a 
vessel called calorimeter, which is immersed 
in a known volume of a liquid. Knowing 
the heat capacity of the liquid in which 
calorimeter is immersed and the heat capacity 
of calorimeter, it is possible to determine the 
heat evolved in the process by measuring 
temperature changes. Measurements are 
made under two different conditions: 
i)   at constant volume,  qV 
ii)  at constant pressure,  qp
(a) ∆U Measurements
For chemical reactions, heat absorbed at 
constant volume, is measured in a bomb 
calorimeter (Fig. 5.7). Here, a steel vessel (the 
bomb) is immersed in a water bath. The whole 
device is called calorimeter. The steel vessel is 
immersed in water bath to ensure that no heat 
is lost to the surroundings. A combustible 
 Fig. 5.7  Bomb calorimeter
substance is burnt in pure dioxygen supplied 
in the steel bomb. Heat evolved during the 
reaction is transferred to the water around the 
bomb and its temperature is monitored. Since 
the bomb calorimeter is sealed, its volume 
does not change i.e., the energy changes 
associated with reactions are measured at 
constant volume. Under these conditions, no 
work is done as the reaction is carried out 
at constant volume in the bomb calorimeter. 
Even for reactions involving gases, there is no 
work done as ∆V = 0. Temperature change of 
the calorimeter produced by the completed 
reaction is then converted to qV, by using the 
known heat capacity of the calorimeter with 
the help of equation 5.11. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 11 :
 chemIstry
146
(b) ∆H Measurements
Measurement of heat change at constant 
pressure (generally under atmospheric pressure) 
can be done in a calorimeter shown in Fig. 5.8. 
We know that ∆Η = qp (at constant p) and, 
therefore, heat absorbed or evolved, qp at 
constant pressure is also called the heat of 
reaction or enthalpy of reaction, ∆rH. 
In an exothermic reaction, heat is evolved, 
and system loses heat to the surroundings. 
Therefore, qp will be negative and ∆rH will 
also be negative. Similarly in an endothermic 
reaction, heat is absorbed, qp is positive and 
∆rH will be positive. 
Problem 5.6
1g of graphite is burnt in a bomb 
calorimeter in excess of oxygen at 298 K 
and 1 atmospheric pressure according 
to the equation 
C (graphite) + O2 (g) → CO2 (g)
During the reaction, temperature rises 
from 298 K to 299 K. If the heat capacity 
Fig. 5.8	
Calorimeter for measuring heat changes 
at constant pressure (atmospheric 
pressure).
of the bomb calorimeter is 20.7kJ/K, 
what is the enthalpy change for the above 
reaction at 298 K and 1 atm?
Solution
Suppose q is the quantity of heat from 
the reaction mixture and CV is the 
heat capacity of the calorimeter, then 
the quantity of heat absorbed by the 
calorimeter. 
q = CV × ∆T
Quantity of heat from the reaction will 
have the same magnitude but opposite 
sign because the heat lost by the system 
(reaction mixture) is equal to the heat 
gained by the calorimeter.
q = –CV × ∆T = – 20.7 kJ/K × (299 – 298) K
= – 20.7 kJ
(Here, negative sign indicates the 
exothermic nature of the reaction)
Thus, ∆U for the combustion of the 1g of 
graphite = – 20.7 kJK–1 
For combustion of 1 mol of graphite, 
=
mol
12 0
20 7
1
1
.
.
g
kJ
g


= – 2.48 ×102 kJ mol–1 ,    Since ∆ ng = 0,
 ∆ H = ∆ U = – 2.48 ×102 kJ mol–1
5.4	
Enthalpy change, ∆rH of a 
reaction – Reaction Enthalpy
In a chemical reaction, reactants are converted 
into products and is represented by, 
Reactants  →  Products
The enthalpy change accompanying a 
reaction is called the reaction enthalpy. The 
enthalpy change of a chemical reaction, is 
given by the symbol ∆rH
∆rH = (sum of enthalpies of products) – (sum  	
                                of enthalpies of reactants)


ai
products
i
reactants
i
i
H
b H
	
(5.14)
Here symbol ∑
(sigma) is used for  
summation and ai and bi are the stoichiometric 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 12 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 147
coefficients of the products and reactants 
respectively in the balanced chemical 
equation. For example, for the reaction
CH4 (g)  +  2O2 (g)   →   CO2 (g)  + 2H2O (l)
=
−
∑
∑
r
i
Pr oducts
i
reac tan ts
i
i
H
a H
b H
∆
       = [Hm (CO2, g) + 2Hm  (H2O, l)]– [Hm (CH4, g)
+ 2Hm (O2, g)]
where Hm is the molar enthalpy.
Enthalpy change is a very useful quantity. 
Knowledge of this quantity is required when 
one needs to plan the heating or cooling 
required to maintain an industrial chemical 
reaction at constant temperature. It is also 
required to calculate temperature dependence 
of equilibrium constant.
(a) Standard Enthalpy of Reactions
Enthalpy of a reaction depends on the 
conditions under which a reaction is carried 
out. It is, therefore, necessary that we 
must specify some standard conditions. 
The standard enthalpy of reaction is the 
enthalpy change for a reaction when all 
the participating substances are in their 
standard states.
The standard state of a substance at a 
specified temperature is its pure form at  
1 bar. For example, the standard state of liquid 
ethanol at 298 K is pure liquid ethanol at  
1 bar; standard state of solid iron at 500 K 
is pure iron at 1 bar. Usually data are taken 
at 298 K.
Standard conditions are denoted by 
adding the superscript  to the symbol ∆H, 
e.g., ∆H
(b)	 Enthalpy 
Changes 
during 
Phase 
Transformations
Phase transformations also involve energy 
changes. Ice, for example, requires heat for 
melting. Normally this melting takes place at 
constant pressure (atmospheric pressure) and 
during phase change, temperature remains 
constant (at 273 K).
H2O(s) → H2O(l); ∆fusH  = 6.00 kJ moI–1
Here ∆fusH is enthalpy of fusion in standard 
state. If water freezes, then process is reversed 
and equal amount of heat is given off to the 
surroundings. 
The enthalpy change that accompanies 
melting of one mole of a solid substance  in 
standard state is called standard enthalpy 
of fusion or molar enthalpy of fusion, 
∆fusH .
Melting of a solid is endothermic, so 
all enthalpies of fusion are positive. Water 
Table 5.1  Standard Enthalpy Changes of Fusion and Vaporisation
(Tf and Tb are melting and boiling points, respectively)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 13 :
 chemIstry
148
requires heat for evaporation. At constant 
temperature of its boiling point Tb and at 
constant pressure:
H2O(l) → H2O(g); ∆vapH = + 40.79 kJ moI–1 
∆vapH is the standard enthalpy of vaporisation.
Amount of heat required to vaporize one 
mole of a liquid at constant temperature 
and under standard pressure (1bar) is called 
its standard enthalpy of vaporization or 
molar enthalpy of vaporization, ∆vapH . 
Sublimation is direct conversion of a 
solid into its vapour. Solid CO2 or ‘dry ice’ 
sublimes at 195K with ∆subH=25.2 kJ mol–1; 
naphthalene sublimes slowly and for this  
∆sub H = 73.0 kJ mol–1 .
Standard enthalpy of sublimation, 
∆subH is the change in enthalpy when one 
mole of a solid substance sublimes at a 
constant temperature and under standard 
pressure (1bar).
The magnitude of the enthalpy change 
depends on the strength of the intermolecular 
interactions in the substance undergoing 
the phase transfomations. For example, 
the strong hydrogen bonds between water 
molecules hold them tightly in liquid phase. 
For an organic liquid, such as acetone, the 
intermolecular dipole-dipole interactions are 
significantly weaker. Thus, it requires less 
heat to vaporise 1 mol of acetone than it does 
to vaporize 1 mol of water. Table 5.1 gives 
values of standard enthalpy changes of fusion 
and vaporisation for some substances.
Solution
We can represent the process of 
evaporation as 
vaporisation
2
2
 H O(1)
H O(g)
1mol
1mol
 
→
No. of moles in 18 g H2O(l) is 
–1
18g
=
=1 mol
18g mol
Heat supplied to evaporate18g water at 
298 K	
= n × ∆vap H 
	
	
= (1 mol) × (44.01 kJ mol–1)
	
	
= 44.01 kJ
(assuming steam behaving as an ideal 
gas).
∆vapU = ∆vapH – p∆V = ∆vapH – ∆ngRT
 ∆vapHV – ∆ngRT = 44.01 kJ
       –(1)(8.314 JK–1mol–1)(298K)(10–3kJ J–1)
∆vapUV = 44.01 kJ – 2.48kJ
          = 41.53 kJ
Problem 5.8
Assuming the water vapour to be a perfect 
gas, calculate the internal energy change 
when 1 mol of water at 100°C and 1 bar 
pressure is converted to ice at 0°C. Given 
the enthalpy of fusion of ice is 6.00 kJ  
mol-1 heat capacity of water is 4.2 J/g°C
The change take place as follows:
Step - 1	
1 mol H2O (l, 100°C)  1 	
	
	
mol (l, 0°C) Enthalpy 	
	
	
change ∆H1
Step - 2 	
1 mol H2O (l, 0°C)  1 mol 	
	
	
H2O( S, 0°C) Enthalpy 	
	
	
change ∆H2
Total enthalpy change will be -
∆H = ∆H1 + ∆H2
∆H1  = - (18 x 4.2 x 100) J mol-1
	
  = - 7560 J mol-1 = - 7.56 k J mol-1
∆H2 = - 6.00 kJ mol-1 
Problem 5.7
A swimmer coming out from a pool is 
covered with a film of water weighing 
about 18g. How much heat must be 
supplied to evaporate this water at  
298 K ? Calculate the internal energy 
of vaporisation at 298K. 
∆vap H  for water
at 298K= 44.01kJ mol–1
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 14 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 149
of aggregation (also known as reference 
states)  is called Standard Molar Enthalpy 
of Formation. Its symbol is ∆fH , where the 
subscript ‘ f ’ indicates that one mole of the 
compound in question has been formed in its 
standard state from its elements in their most 
stable states of aggregation. The reference 
state of an element is its most stable state 
of aggregation at 25°C and 1 bar pressure.  
For example, the reference state of dihydrogen 
is H2 gas and those of dioxygen, carbon 
and sulphur are O2 gas, Cgraphite and Srhombic 
respectively. Some reactions with standard 
molar enthalpies of formation are as follows. 
Table 5.2	
Standard Molar Enthalpies of Formation (∆f H ) at 298K of a Few 
Selected Substances
Therefore,
  ∆H = - 7.56 kJ mol-1 + (-6.00 kJ mol-1) 	
              = -13.56 kJ mol-1 
There is negligible change in the volume 
during the change form liquid to solid 
state.
Therefore, p∆v = ∆ng RT = 0
∆H = ∆U = - 13.56kJ mol-1
(c) Standard Enthalpy of Formation 
The standard enthalpy change for the 
formation of one mole of a compound from 
its elements in their most stable states 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 15 :
 chemIstry
150
H2(g) + ½O2 (g) → H2O(1);
∆f H = –285.8 kJ mol–1
C (graphite, s) + 2H2(g) → Ch4 (g);
∆f H = –74.81 kJ mol–1
2C (graphite, s)+3H2 (g)+ ½O2(g) → C2H5OH(1);
∆f H  = – 277.7kJ mol–1
It is important to understand that a 
standard molar enthalpy of formation, ∆fH , 
is just a special case of ∆rH , where one mole 
of a compound is formed from its constituent 
elements, as in the above three equations, 
where 1 mol of each, water, methane and 
ethanol is formed. In contrast, the enthalpy 
change for an exothermic reaction:
CaO(s) + CO2(g) → CaCo3(s);
∆rH  = – 178.3kJ mol–1
is not an enthalpy of formation of calcium 
carbonate, since calcium carbonate has been 
formed from other compounds, and not from 
its constituent elements. Also, for the reaction 
given below, enthalpy change is not standard 
enthalpy of formation, ∆fH  for HBr(g).
H2(g) + Br2(l) → 2HBr(g);
 ∆r H  = – 178.3kJ mol–1
Here two moles, instead of one mole of the 
product is formed from the elements, i.e., 
∆r H  = 2∆f H
Therefore, by dividing all coefficients in 
the balanced equation by 2, expression for 
enthalpy of formation of HBr (g) is written as 
½H2(g) + ½Br2(1) → HBr(g);
∆f H = – 36.4 kJ mol–1
Standard enthalpies of formation of some 
common substances are given in Table 5.2.
By convention, standard enthalpy for 
formation, ∆fH , of an element in reference 
state, i.e., its most stable state of aggregation 
is taken as zero. 
Suppose, you are a chemical engineer and 
want to know how much heat is required to 
decompose calcium carbonate to lime and 
carbon dioxide, with all the substances in 
their standard state. 
CaCO3(s) → CaO(s) + CO2(g); ∆r H  = ?
Here, we can make use of standard enthalpy 
of formation and calculate the enthalpy 
change for the reaction. The following general 
equation can be used for the enthalpy change 
calculation. 
∆rH = 
i∑ai ∆f H (products) – 
i∑bi ∆f H (reactants)
	
                (5.15)
where a and b represent the coefficients of 
the products and reactants in the balanced 
equation. Let us apply the above equation for 
decomposition of calcium carbonate. Here, 
coefficients ‘a’ and ‘b’ are 1 each. Therefore,
∆rH = ∆f H  = [CaO(s)]+ ∆f H  [CO2(g)]
– ∆f H  = [CaCO3(s)]
=1 (–635.1 kJ mol–1) + 1(–393.5 kJ mol–1)
–1(–1206.9 kJ mol–1)
= 178.3 kJ mol–1
Thus, the decomposition of CaCO3 (s) is 
an endothermic process and you have to heat 
it for getting the desired products. 
(d) Thermochemical Equations
A balanced chemical equation together with 
the value of its ∆rH is called a thermochemical 
equation. We specify the physical state 
(alongwith allotropic state) of the substance 
in an equation. For example: 
C2H5OH(l) + 3O2(g) → 2CO2(g) + 3H2O(l);
∆rH = – 1367 kJ mol–1
The above equation describes the 
combustion of liquid ethanol at constant 
temperature and pressure. The negative sign 
of enthalpy change indicates that this is an 
exothermic reaction. 
It would be necessary to remember the 
following conventions regarding thermo-
chemical equations. 
1.	 The coefficients in a balanced thermo-
chemical equation refer to the number of 
moles (never molecules) of reactants and 
products involved in the reaction. 
2.	 The numerical value of ∆rH  refers to the 
number of moles of substances specified 
by an equation. Standard enthalpy change 
∆rH will have units as kJ mol–1. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 16 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 151
To illustrate the concept, let us consider 
the calculation of heat of reaction for the 
following  reaction :
Fe O
s
H
g
Fe s
H O l
2
3
2
2
3
2
3



,
From the Table (5.2) of standard enthalpy of 
formation (∆f H ), we find :
∆f H (H2O,l) = –285.83 kJ mol–1;
∆f H (Fe2O3,s)  = – 824.2 kJ mol–1; 
Also  ∆f H (Fe, s) = 0 and
         ∆f H (H2, g) = 0 as per convention
Then, 
∆f H1
 = 3(–285.83 kJ mol–1) 
                                 – 1(– 824.2 kJ mol–1)
         =  (–857.5 + 824.2) kJ mol–1
               =  –33.3 kJ mol–1
Note that the coefficients used in these 
calculations are pure numbers, which 
are equal to the respective stoichiometric 
coefficients. The unit for ∆rH  is  
kJ mol–1, which means per mole of reaction. 
Once we balance the chemical equation in a 
particular way, as above, this defines the mole 
of reaction. If we had balanced the equation 
differently, for example,
1
2
3
2
3
2
2
3
2
2
Fe O
s
H
g
Fe s
H O l




then this amount of reaction would be one 
mole of reaction and ∆rH  would be
∆f H 2
 = 3
2 (–285.83 kJ mol–1)
          – 1
2 (–824.2 kJ mol–1)
  = (– 428.7 + 412.1) kJ mol–1
= –16.6 kJ mol–1 =  ½ ∆r H 1
 
It shows that enthalpy is an extensive 
quantity.
3.	 When a chemical equation is reversed, 
the value of ∆rH  is reversed in sign. For 
example
N2(g) + 3H2 (g) → 2NH3 (g);
∆r H  = – 91.8 kJ. mol–1
2NH3(g) → N2(g) + 3H2 (g);
∆r H  = + 91.8 kJ mol–1
(e)	 Hess’s 
Law 
of 
Constant 
Heat 
Summation 
We know that enthalpy is a state function, 
therefore the change in enthalpy is independent 
of the path between initial state (reactants) 
and final state (products). In other words, 
enthalpy change for a reaction is the same 
whether it occurs in one step or in a series 
of steps. This may be stated as follows in the 
form of Hess’s Law.
If a reaction takes place in several 
steps then its standard reaction enthalpy 
is the sum of the standard enthalpies of 
the intermediate reactions into which the 
overall reaction may be divided at the same 
temperature.
Let us understand the importance of this 
law with the help of an example.
Consider the enthalpy change for the 
reaction
C (graphite,s) +   O2 (g) → CO (g); ∆r H  = ?
Although CO(g) is the major product, some 
CO2 gas is always produced in this reaction. 
Therefore, we cannot measure enthalpy 
change for the above reaction directly. 
However, if we can find some other reactions 
involving related species, it is possible to 
calculate the enthalpy change for the above 
reaction. 
Let us consider the following reactions:  
C (graphite,s) + O2 (g) → CO2 (g);	
∆r H  = – 393.5 kJ mol–1 (i)
CO (g) + 1
2 O2 (g) → CO2 (g)
∆r H  = – 283.0 kJ mol–1 (ii)
We can combine the above two reactions 
in such a way so as to obtain the desired 
reaction. To get one mole of CO(g) on the 
right, we reverse equation (ii). In this, heat 
is absorbed instead of being released, so we 
change sign of ∆rH  value
CO2 (g) → CO (g) +   O2 (g);
∆r H  = + 283.0 kJ mol–1 (iii)  
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 17 :
 chemIstry
152
Adding equation (i) and (iii), we get the 
desired equation, 
C graphite s
O
g
CO g
,
;




1
2
2
for which ∆r H   = (– 393.5 + 283.0)
= – 110.5 kJ mol–1
In general, if enthalpy of an overall 
reaction A→B along one route is ∆rH and 
∆rH1, ∆rH2, ∆rH3..... representing enthalpies 
of reactions leading to same product, B along 
another route, then we have
∆rH = ∆rH1 + ∆rH2 + ∆rH3 ...	
(5.16) 
It can be represented as:
 
5.5	
Enthalpies for different types 
of reactions
It is convenient to give name to enthalpies 
specifying the types of reactions.
(a)	 Standard Enthalpy of Combustion 
(symbol : ∆cH )
Combustion reactions are exothermic in 
nature. These are important in industry, 
rocketry, and other walks of life. Standard 
enthalpy of combustion is defined as the 
enthalpy change per mole (or per unit amount) 
of a substance, when it undergoes combustion 
and all the reactants and products being 
in their standard states at the specified 
temperature. 
Cooking gas in cylinders contains mostly 
butane (C4H10). During complete combustion 
of one mole of butane, 2658 kJ of heat is 
released. We can write the thermochemical 
reactions for this as: 
C H
g
O
g
CO
g
H O
4
10
2
2
2
13
2
4
5
1
( )
( )
( )
( );



∆C H   = – 2658.0 kJ mol–1
Similarly, combustion of glucose gives out 
2802.0 kJ/mol of heat, for which the overall 
equation is :
C H O
g
O
g
CO
g
H O
6
12
6
2
2
2
6
6
6
1
( )
( )
( )
( );



∆C H   = – 2802.0 kJ mol–1
Our body also generates energy from food 
by the same overall process as combustion, 
although the final products are produced after 
a series of complex bio-chemical reactions 
involving enzymes.
A
B
C
D
∆H1
∆rH2
∆rH3
∆rH
Problem 5.9
The combustion of one mole of benzene 
takes place at 298 K and 1 atm. After 
combustion, CO2(g) and H2O (1) are 
produced and 3267.0 kJ of heat is 
liberated. Calculate the standard 
enthalpy of formation, ∆f H  of benzene. 
Standard enthalpies of formation of 
CO2(g) and H2O(l) are –393.5 kJ mol–1 
and – 285.83 kJ mol–1 respectively. 
Solution
The formation reaction of benezene is 
given by :
6
3
2
6
6
C graphite
H
g
C H
l



;
∆f H   = ? ... (i)
The enthalpy of combustion of 1 mol 
of benzene is :
C H
l
O
CO
g
H O l
6
6
2
2
2
15
2
6
3



;
∆C H   = – 3267 kJ mol–1... (ii)
The enthalpy of formation of 1 mol of 
CO2(g) :
C graphite
O
g
CO
g




2
2
;
∆f H   = – 393.5 kJ mol–1... (iii)
The enthalpy of formation of 1 mol of 
H2O(l) is :
H
g
O
g
H O l
2
2
2
1
2


;
∆C H   = – 285.83 kJ mol–1... (iv)
multiplying eqn. (iii) by  6 and eqn. (iv)  
by 3 we get:
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 18 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 153
6
6
6
2
2
C graphite
O
g
CO
g



;
∆f H   = – 2361 kJ mol–1
3
3
2
3
1
2
2
2
H
g
O
g
H O


;
∆f H   = – 857.49 kJ mol–1
Summing up the above two equations :
6
3
15
2
6
3
2
2
2
2
C graphite
H
g
O
g
CO
g
H O l






;
∆f H   = – 3218.49 kJ mol–1... (v)
Reversing equation (ii);
6
3
15
2
2
2
6
6
2
CO
g
H O l
C H
l
O



;
∆f H   = – 3267.0 kJ mol–1... (vi)
Adding equations (v) and (vi), we get
6
3
2
6
6
C graphite
H
g
C H
l



;
∆f H   = – 48.51 kJ mol–1... (iv)
In this case, the enthalpy of atomization is 
same as the enthalpy of sublimation.
(c)	 Bond Enthalpy (symbol: ∆bondH )
Chemical reactions involve the breaking and 
making of chemical bonds. Energy is required 
to break a bond and energy is released when a 
bond is formed. It is possible to relate heat of 
reaction to changes in energy associated with 
breaking and making of chemical bonds. With 
reference to the enthalpy changes associated 
with chemical bonds, two different terms are 
used in thermodynamics.
 (i)	
Bond dissociation enthalpy
(ii)	
Mean bond enthalpy
Let us discuss these terms with reference 
to diatomic and polyatomic molecules.
Diatomic Molecules: Consider the following 
process in which the bonds in one mole of 
dihydrogen gas (H2) are broken:
H2(g)  →  2H(g);  ∆H–HH   = 435.0 kJ mol–1
The enthalpy change involved in this process 
is the bond dissociation enthalpy of H–H 
bond. The bond dissociation enthalpy is the 
change in enthalpy when one mole of covalent 
bonds of a gaseous covalent compound is 
broken to form products in the gas phase.
Note that it is the same as the enthalpy of 
atomization of dihydrogen. This is true for all 
diatomic molecules. For example:
Cl2(g)  →  2Cl(g);  ∆Cl–ClH   = 242 kJ mol–1
O2(g)  →  2O(g);  ∆O=OH  = 428 kJ mol–1
In the case of polyatomic molecules, bond 
dissociation enthalpy is different for different 
bonds within the same molecule.
Polyatomic Molecules: Let us now consider 
a polyatomic molecule like methane, CH4. 
The overall thermochemical equation for its 
atomization reaction is given below: 
4
CH (g)
C(g)
4H(g);
→
+
∆a H   = 1665 kJ mol–1
In methane, all the four C – H bonds are 
identical in bond length and energy. However, 
the energies required to break the individual 
C – H bonds in each successive step differ :
(b)	 Enthalpy of Atomization  
(symbol: ∆aH )
Consider the following example of atomization 
of dihydrogen 
H2(g)  →  2H(g);  ∆aH  = 435.0 kJ mol–1
You can see that H atoms are formed by 
breaking H–H bonds in dihydrogen. The 
enthalpy change in this process is known 
as enthalpy of atomization, ∆aH . It is the 
enthalpy change on breaking one mole of 
bonds completely to obtain atoms in the gas 
phase.
In case of diatomic molecules, like 
dihydrogen (given above), the enthalpy of 
atomization is also the bond dissociation 
enthalpy. The other examples of enthalpy of 
atomization can be 
CH4(g)  →  C(g) + 4H(g); ∆aH   = 1665 kJ mol–1
Note that the products are only atoms of C 
and H in gaseous phase. Now see the following 
reaction:
Na(s)  →  Na(g);  ∆aH  = 108.4 kJ mol–1
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 19 :
 chemIstry
154
CH4(g) → CH3(g)+H(g);∆bond H = +427 kJ mol–1
CH3(g) → CH2(g)+H(g);∆bond H = +439 kJ mol–1
CH2(g) → CH(g)+H(g);∆bond H = +452 kJ mol–1
CH(g) → C(g)+H(g);∆bond H = +347 kJ mol–1
Therefore,
CH4(g) → C(g)+4H(g);∆a H = 1665 kJ mol–1
In such cases we use mean bond enthalpy 
of C – H bond.
For example in CH4, ∆C–HH   is calculated as: 
∆C–HH = ¼ (∆a H) = ¼ (1665 kJ mol–1)
                              = 416 kJ mol–1
We find that mean C–H bond enthalpy 
in methane is 416 kJ/mol. It has been 
found that mean C–H bond enthalpies differ 
slightly from compound to compound, as 
in CH3CH2Cl, CH3NO2, etc., but it does not 
differ in a great deal*. Using Hess’s law, bond 
enthalpies can be calculated. Bond enthalpy 
values of some single and multiple bonds are 
given in Table 5.3. The reaction enthalpies are 
very important quantities as these arise from 
the changes that accompany the breaking of 
old bonds and formation of the new bonds. 
We can predict enthalpy of a reaction in gas 
phase, if we know different bond enthalpies. 
The standard enthalpy of reaction, ∆rH is 
related to bond enthalpies of the reactants 
and products in gas phase reactions as:
∆r H      	
(5.17)**
This relationship is particularly more 
useful when the required values of ∆f H are 
not available. The net enthalpy change of a 
reaction is the amount of energy required 
to break all the bonds in the reactant 
molecules minus the amount of energy 
required to break all the bonds in the product 
molecules. Remember that this relationship is 
approximate and is valid when all substances 




bond enthalpies
bond enthalpies
reactants
products
Table 5.3(a) Some Mean Single Bond Enthalpies in kJ mol–1 at 298 K
N = N	
418	
	
C = C	 	
611	
	
O = O	 498
N ≡ N	
946	
	
C ≡  C	 	
837
C = N	
615	
	
C = O 	 	
741
C ≡ N 	
891	
	
C ≡ O	 	
1070
Table 5.3(b) Some Mean Multiple Bond Enthalpies in kJ mol–1 at 298 K
**	If we use enthalpy of bond formation, (∆f H bond  ), which is the enthalpy change when one mole of a particular type of 
bond is formed from gaseous atom, then ∆f H  = ∑∆f H
bonds of products – ∑∆f H 
bonds of reactants

*	 Note that symbol used for bond dissociation enthalpy and mean bond enthalpy is the same.
H
435.8
C
414
347
N
389
293
159
O 
464
351
201
138
F
569
439
272
184
155
Si
293
289
-
368
540
176
P
318
264
209
351
490
213
213
S
339
259
-
-
327
226
230
213
Cl
431
330
201
205
255
360
331
251
243
Br
368
276
243
-
197
289
272
213
218
192
I
297
238
-
201
-
213
213
-
209
180
151
H
C
N
O
F
Si
P
S
CI
Br
I
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 20 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 155
(reactants and products) in the reaction are 
in gaseous state. 
(d)  Lattice Enthalpy
The lattice enthalpy of an ionic compound is 
the enthalpy change which occurs when one 
mole of an ionic compound dissociates into 
its ions in gaseous state.
Na Cl
s
Na
g
Cl
g







( )
;
	
	
∆latticeH  = +788 kJ mol–1
Since it is impossible to determine lattice 
enthalpies directly by experiment, we use 
an indirect method where we construct an 
enthalpy diagram called a Born-Haber Cycle 
(Fig. 5.9).
Let us now calculate the lattice enthalpy 
of Na+Cl–(s) by following steps given below : 
1.	 Na s
Na g
( )
( )
→
, sublimation of sodium 
metal, ∆subH  = 108.4 kJ mol–1
2.	 Na g
Na
g
e
g
( )
( )
( )



1
, the ionization of 
sodium atoms, ionization enthalpy 
	
∆iH = 496 kJ mol–1
3.	 1
2
2
Cl
g
Cl g
( )
( )
→
, the dissociation of 
chlorine, the reaction enthalpy is half the 
bond dissociation enthalpy. 
	
1
2
∆bondH = 121 kJ mol–1
4.	 Cl g
e
g
Cl g
( )
( )
( )


1
electron gained 
by chlorine atoms. The electron gain 
enthalpy, ∆egH   = – 348.6 kJ mol–1. 
	
You have learnt about ionization enthalpy 
and electron gain enthalpy in Unit 3. 
In fact, these terms have been taken 
from thermodynamics. Earlier terms, 
ionization energy and electron affinity 
were in practice in place of the above 
terms (see the box for justification).
Fig. 5.9 	 Enthalpy diagram for lattice enthalpy of 
NaCl
5.	 Na (g)
Cl (g)
Na Cl (s)
+
−
+
−
+
→
 
The sequence of steps is shown in  
Fig. 5.9, and is known as a Born-Haber 
Ionization Energy and Electron Affinity
Ionization energy and electron affinity 
are defined at absolute zero. At any other 
temperature, heat capacities for the reactants 
and the products have to be taken into 
account. Enthalpies of reactions for 
M(g)   →   M+(g)   + e–    (for ionization)
M(g)  +  e–    →   M–(g)  (for electron gain)
at temperature, T is 
∆rH(T ) = ∆rH(0) + 
T
0∫
∆rCP
dT
The value of Cp for each species in the above 
reaction is 5/2 R  (CV = 3/2R) 
So,  ∆rCp
  = + 5/2 R (for ionization)
       ∆rCp
  = – 5/2 R (for electron gain)
Therefore, 
∆rH (ionization enthalpy) 
          = E0 (ionization energy) + 5/2 RT
∆rH  (electron gain enthalpy) 
         = – A( electron affinity) – 5/2 RT
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 21 :
 chemIstry
156
The enthalpy of solution of AB(s), ∆solH, 
in water is, therefore, determined by the 
selective values of the lattice enthalpy, ∆latticeH 
and enthalpy of hydration of ions, ∆hydH as 
∆sol H  = ∆latticeH  + ∆hydH 
For most of the ionic compounds, ∆sol 
H is positive and the dissociation process 
is endothermic. Therefore the solubility of 
most salts in water increases with rise of 
temperature. If the lattice enthalpy is very 
high, the dissolution of the compound may 
not take place at all. Why do many fluorides 
tend to be less soluble than the corresponding 
chlorides? Estimates of the magnitudes of 
enthalpy changes may be made by using 
tables of bond energies (enthalpies) and lattice 
energies (enthalpies).
(f)   Enthalpy of Dilution 
It is known that enthalpy of solution is the 
enthalpy change associated with the addition 
of a specified amount of solute to the specified 
amount of solvent at a constant temperature 
and pressure. This argument can be applied 
to any solvent with slight modification. 
Enthalpy change for dissolving one mole of 
gaseous hydrogen chloride in 10 mol of water 
can be represented by the following equation. 
For convenience we will use the symbol aq. 
for water 
HCl(g) + 10 aq. → HCl.10 aq. 	
∆H = –69.01 kJ / mol
Let us consider the following set of 
enthalpy changes:
(S-1) HCl(g) + 25 aq. → HCl.25 aq. 	
∆H = –72.03 kJ / mol 
(S-2) HCl(g) + 40 aq. → HCl.40 aq. 	
∆H = –72.79 kJ / mol
(S-3) HCl(g) +  ∞ aq. → HCl. ∞ aq. 	
∆H = –74.85 kJ / mol
The values of ∆H show general dependence 
of the enthalpy of solution on amount of 
solvent. As more and more solvent is used, 
the enthalpy of solution approaches a limiting 
value, i.e, the value in infinitely dilute 
solution. For hydrochloric acid this value of 
∆H is given above in equation (S-3). 
cycle. The importance of the cycle is that, 
the sum of the enthalpy changes round a 
cycle is zero. Applying Hess’s law, we get,
∆latticeH = 411.2 + 108.4 + 121 + 496 – 348.6
∆latticeH = + 788kJ
for NaCl(s)  Na+(g) + Cl–(g)
Internal energy is smaller by 2RT (because ∆ng 
= 2) and is equal to + 783 kJ mol–1.
Now we use the value of lattice enthalpy 
to calculate enthalpy of solution from the 
expression:
∆solH = ∆latticeH + ∆hydH 
For one mole of NaCl(s), 
lattice enthalpy  = + 788 kJ mol–1
and ∆hydH  = – 784 kJ mol–1( from the 	
	
literature)
∆sol H = + 788 kJ mol–1 – 784 kJ mol–1
            = + 4 kJ mol–1
The dissolution of NaCl(s) is accompanied 
by very little heat change. 
(e)   Enthalpy of Solution (symbol : ∆solH )
Enthalpy of solution of a substance is the 
enthalpy change when one mole of it dissolves 
in a specified amount of solvent. The enthalpy 
of solution at infinite dilution is the enthalpy 
change observed on dissolving the substance 
in an infinite amount of solvent when the 
interactions between the ions (or solute 
molecules) are negligible. 
When an ionic compound dissolves in a 
solvent, the ions leave their ordered positions 
on the crystal lattice. These are now more free in 
solution. But solvation of these ions (hydration 
in case solvent is water) also occurs at the 
same time. This is shown diagrammatically, 
for an ionic compound, AB (s) 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 22 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 157
If we subtract the first equation (equation 
S-1) from the second equation (equation S-2) 
in the above set of equations, we obtain– 
HCl.25 aq. + 15 aq. → HCl.40 aq.  
∆H = [ –72.79 – (–72.03)] kJ / mol 
      = – 0.76 kJ / mol 
This value (–0.76kJ/mol) of ∆H is enthalpy 
of dilution. It is the heat withdrawn from 
the surroundings when additional solvent is 
added to the solution. The enthalpy of dilution 
of a solution is dependent on the original 
concentration of the solution and the amount 
of solvent added. 
5.6	
spontaneity
The first law of thermodynamics tells us 
about the relationship between the heat 
absorbed and the work performed on or 
by a system. It puts no restrictions on 
the direction of heat flow. However, the 
flow of heat is unidirectional from higher 
temperature to lower temperature. In fact, 
all naturally occurring processes whether 
chemical or physical will tend to proceed 
spontaneously in one direction only. For 
example, a gas expanding to fill the available 
volume, burning carbon in dioxygen giving 
carbon dioxide. 
But heat will not flow from colder body to 
warmer body on its own, the gas in a container 
will not spontaneously contract into one 
corner or carbon dioxide will not form carbon 
and dioxygen spontaneously. These and many 
other spontaneously occurring changes show 
unidirectional change. We may ask ‘what is 
the driving force of spontaneously occurring 
changes ? What determines the direction of a 
spontaneous change ? In this section, we shall 
establish some criterion for these processes 
whether these will take place or not.
Let us first understand what do we mean 
by spontaneous reaction or change ? You 
may think by your common observation that 
spontaneous reaction is one which occurs 
immediately when contact is made between 
the reactants. Take the case of combination 
of hydrogen and oxygen. These gases may 
be mixed at room temperature and left for 
many years without observing any perceptible 
change. Although the reaction is taking place 
between them, it is at an extremely slow 
rate. It is still called spontaneous reaction. 
So spontaneity means ‘having the potential 
to proceed without the assistance of external 
agency’. However, it does not tell about the 
rate of the reaction or process. Another aspect 
of spontaneous reaction or process, as we see 
is that these cannot reverse their direction on 
their own. We may summarise it as  follows: 
A spontaneous process is an  
irreversible process and may only be 
reversed by some external agency.
(a)  Is Decrease in Enthalpy a Criterion  
 for Spontaneity ?
If we examine the phenomenon like flow of 
water down hill or fall of a stone on to the 
ground, we find that there is a net decrease 
in potential energy in the direction of change. 
By analogy, we may be tempted to state that 
a chemical reaction is spontaneous in a 
given direction, because decrease in energy 
has taken place, as in the case of exothermic 
reactions. For example:
1
2 N2(g) + 
H2(g) = NH3(g); 
                                       ∆r H  = – 46.1 kJ mol–1
1
2 H2(g) + 1
2 Cl2(g) = HCl (g);
                                    ∆r H  = – 92.32 kJ mol–1
H2(g) + 1
2
 O2(g) → H2O(l) ;
                                    ∆r H  = –285.8 kJ mol–1
The decrease in enthalpy in passing from 
reactants to products may be shown for any 
exothermic reaction on an enthalpy diagram 
as shown in Fig. 5.10(a). 
Thus, the postulate that driving force for 
a chemical reaction may be due to decrease 
in energy sounds ‘reasonable’ as the basis of 
evidence so far !
Now let us examine the following reactions:
1
2
 N2(g) + O2(g) → NO2(g); 
                                       ∆r H = +33.2 kJ mol–1
C(graphite, s) + 2 S(l) → CS2(l);  
                                     ∆r H = +128.5 kJ mol–1
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 23 :
 chemIstry
158
These reactions  though endothermic, are 
spontaneous. The increase in enthalpy may 
be represented on an enthalpy diagram as 
shown in Fig. 5.10(b).
Fig. 5.10 (a)	
Enthalpy diagram for exothermic 
reactions
Fig. 5.10 (b)	
Enthalpy diagram for endothermic 
reactions
Fig. 5.11  Diffusion of two gases
respectively and separated by a movable 
partition [Fig. 5.11 (a)]. When the partition is 
withdrawn [Fig. 5.11(b)], the gases begin to 
diffuse into each other and after a period of 
time, diffusion will be complete.
Let us examine the process. Before 
partition, if we were to pick up the gas 
molecules from left container, we would be 
sure that these will be molecules of gas A 
and similarly if we were to pick up the gas 
molecules from right container, we would 
be sure that these will be molecules of gas 
B. But, if we were to pick up molecules from 
container when partition is removed, we are 
not sure whether the molecules picked are of 
gas A or gas B. We say that the system has 
become less predictable or more chaotic. 
We may now formulate another postulate:  
in an isolated system, there is always a 
tendency for the systems’ energy to become 
more disordered or chaotic and this could be 
a criterion for spontaneous change !
At this point, we introduce another 
thermodynamic function, entropy denoted 
as S. The above mentioned disorder is the 
manifestation of entropy. To form a mental 
Therefore, it becomes obvious that while 
decrease in enthalpy may be a contributory 
factor for spontaneity, but it is not true for 
all cases.
(b) Entropy and Spontaneity
Then, what drives the spontaneous process 
in a given direction ?  Let us examine such a 
case in which ∆H = 0 i.e., there is no change in 
enthalpy, but still the process is spontaneous.
Let us consider diffusion of two gases 
into each other in a closed container which 
is isolated from the surroundings as shown 
in Fig. 5.11. 
The two gases, say, gas A and gas B are 
represented by black dots and white dots 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 24 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 159
picture, one can think of entropy as a measure 
of the degree of randomness or disorder in the 
system. The greater the disorder in an isolated 
system, the higher is the entropy.  As far as a 
chemical reaction is concerned, this entropy 
change  can be attributed to rearrangement of 
atoms or ions from one pattern in the reactants 
to another (in the products). If the structure 
of the products is very much disordered than 
that of the reactants, there will be a resultant 
increase in entropy. The change in entropy 
accompanying a chemical reaction may be 
estimated qualitatively by a consideration of 
the structures of the species taking part in the 
reaction. Decrease of regularity in structure 
would mean increase in entropy. For a given 
substance, the crystalline solid state is the 
state of lowest entropy (most ordered), The 
gaseous state is state of highest entropy.
Now let us try to quantify entropy. One way 
to calculate the degree of disorder or chaotic 
distribution of energy among molecules 
would be through statistical method which 
is beyond the scope of this treatment. Other 
way would be to relate this process to the 
heat involved in a process which would make 
entropy a thermodynamic concept. Entropy, 
like any other thermodynamic property such 
as internal energy U and enthalpy H is a state 
function and ∆S is independent of path.
Whenever heat is added to the system, 
it increases molecular motions causing 
increased randomness in the system. Thus 
heat (q) has randomising influence on the 
system. Can we then equate ∆S with q ? Wait ! 
Experience suggests us that the distribution 
of heat also depends on the temperature at 
which heat is added to the system. A system at 
higher temperature has greater randomness 
in it  than one at lower temperature. Thus, 
temperature is the measure of average 
chaotic motion of particles in the system. 
Heat added to a system at lower temperature 
causes greater randomness than when the 
same quantity of heat is added to it at higher 
temperature. This suggests that the entropy 
change is inversely proportional to the 
temperature. ∆S is related with q and T for a 
reversible reaction as : 
∆S = q
T
rev 	
(5.18)
The total entropy change (∆Stotal) for the 
system and surroundings of a spontaneous 
process is given by



S
S
S
total
system
surr


0                    (5.19)
When a system is in equilibrium, the 
entropy is maximum, and the change in 
entropy, ∆S = 0.
We can say that entropy for a spontaneous 
process increases till it reaches maximum 
and at equilibrium the change in entropy is 
zero. Since entropy is a state property, we can 
calculate the change in entropy of a reversible 
process by
∆Ssys = 
qsys rev
,
T
  
We find that both for reversible and 
irreversible expansion for an ideal gas, under 
isothermal conditions, ∆U = 0,  but ∆Stotal  
i.e., 

S
S
sys
surr

is not zero for irreversible 
process. Thus,  ∆U does not discriminate 
between reversible and irreversible process, 
whereas ∆S does.
Problem 5.10
Predict in which of the following, entropy 
increases/decreases :
(i)	
A liquid crystallizes into a solid.
(ii)	 Temperature of a crystalline solid 
is raised from 0 K to 115 K.
iii
NaHCO
s
Na CO
s
CO
g
H O g






2
3
2
3
2
2
(iv)	 H
g
H g
2
2


Solution
(i)	
After freezing, the molecules attain 
an ordered state and therefore, 
entropy decreases.
(ii)	 At 0 K, the contituent particles are 
static and entropy is minimum. 
If temperature is raised to 115 K, 
these begin to move and oscillate 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 25 :
 chemIstry
160
about their equilibrium positions 
in the lattice and system becomes 
more disordered, therefore entropy 
increases.
(iii)	 Reactant, NaHCO3 is a solid and it 
has low entropy. Among products 
there are one solid and two gases. 
Therefore, the products represent a 
condition of higher entropy.
(iv)	 Here one molecule gives two atoms 
i.e., number of particles increases 
leading to more disordered state. 
Two moles of H atoms have 
higher entropy than one mole of 
dihydrogen molecule.
Problem 5.11
For oxidation of iron,
4
3
2
2
2
3
Fe s
O
g
Fe O
s



entropy change is – 549.4 JK–1 mol–1 
at 298 K. Inspite of negative entropy 
change of this reaction, why is the 
reaction spontaneous?
(∆rH 
for 
this 
reaction 
is 
 
–1648 × 103 J mol–1)
Solution
One decides the spontaneity of a 
reaction by considering



S
S
S
total
sys
surr


. For calculating 
∆Ssurr, we have to consider the heat 
absorbed by the surroundings which 
is equal to – ∆rH . At temperature T, 
entropy change of the surroundings is






1648 10
298
3
1
J mol
K
= 5530 JK–1mol–1
Thus, total entropy change for this 
reaction
r
total
S




5530
549 4
1
1
1
1
JK mol
JK mol
–
–
–
–
.
    
= 4980.6 JK–1 mol–1
This shows that the above reaction is 
spontaneous.
(c)	 Gibbs Energy and Spontaneity
We have seen that for a system, it is the 
total entropy change, ∆Stotal which decides 
the spontaneity of the process. But most of 
the chemical reactions fall into the category 
of either closed systems or open systems. 
Therefore, for most of the chemical reactions 
there are changes in both enthalpy and 
entropy. It is clear from the discussion in 
previous sections that neither decrease in 
enthalpy nor increase in entropy alone can 
determine the direction of spontaneous 
change for these systems.
For this purpose, we define a new 
thermodynamic function the Gibbs energy 
or Gibbs function, G, as 
G = H – TS                                      (5.20)
Gibbs function, G is an extensive property 
and a state function.
The change in Gibbs energy for the 
system, ∆Gsys can be written as




G
H
T S
S
T
sys
sys
sys
sys
=


At constant temperature, 





G
H
T S
sys
sys
sys
=
 
Usually the subscript ‘system’ is dropped 
and we simply write this equation as 
 


G
H
T S


                                 (5.21)
Thus, Gibbs energy change = enthalpy 
change – temperature × entropy change, and 
is referred to as the Gibbs equation, one of 
the most important equations in chemistry. 
Here, we have considered both terms together 
for spontaneity: energy (in terms of ∆H) 
and entropy (∆S, a measure of disorder) as 
indicated earlier. Dimensionally if we analyse, 
we find that ∆G has units of energy because, 
both ∆H and the T∆S are energy terms, since 
T∆S = (K) (J/K) = J.
Now let us consider how ∆G is related to 
reaction spontaneity.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 26 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 161
We know, 
∆Stotal = ∆Ssys +  ∆Ssurr
	
  If the system is in thermal equilibrium with 
the surrounding, then the temperature of the 
surrounding is same as that of the system. 
Also, increase in enthalpy of the surrounding 
is equal to decrease in the enthalpy of the 
system.
Therefore, entropy change of surroundings, 



Ssurr =
H
T
H
T
surr
sys




S
S
total
sys






H
T
sys
Rearranging the above equation:
T∆Stotal  =	 T∆Ssys – ∆Hsys
For spontaneous process, Stotal 0 , so
              T∆Ssys – ∆Hsys > Ο






H
T S
sys
sys
0
Using equation 5.21, the above equation can 
be written as
–∆G > O



G
H
T S


0                                   (5.22)
∆Hsys is the enthalpy change of a reaction, 
T∆Ssys is the energy which is not available to do 
useful work. So ∆G is the net energy available 
to do useful work and is thus a measure of the 
‘free energy’. For this reason, it is also known 
as the free energy of the reaction.
∆G gives a criteria for spontaneity at 
constant pressure and temperature.
(i)	 If ∆G is negative (< 0), the process is 
spontaneous.
(ii)	 If ∆G is positive (> 0), the process is non 
spontaneous.
Note : If a reaction has a positive enthalpy 
change and positive entropy change, it can 
be spontaneous when T∆S is large enough to 
outweigh ∆H. This can happen in two ways;  
(a) The positive entropy change of the system 
can be ‘small’ in which case T must be 
large. (b) The positive entropy change of the 
system can be ‘large’, in which case T may 
be small. The former is one of the reasons 
why reactions are often carried out at high 
temperature. Table 5.4 summarises the effect 
of temperature on spontaneity of reactions.
(d)	 Entropy and Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
We know that for an isolated system 
the change in energy remains constant. 
Therefore, increase in entropy in such 
systems is the natural direction of a 
spontaneous change. This, in fact is the 
second law of thermodynamics. Like first 
law of thermodynamics, second law can also 
be stated in several ways. The second law of 
thermodynamics explains why spontaneous 
exothermic reactions are so common. 
In exothermic reactions heat released 
by the reaction increases the disorder 
of the surroundings and overall entropy 
change is positive which makes the reaction 
spontaneous.
(e)	 Absolute Entropy and Third Law of 
Thermodynamics 
Molecules of a substance may move in a 
straight line in any direction, they may 
spin like a top and the bonds in the 
molecules may stretch and compress. 
These motions of the molecule are called 
translational, rotational and vibrational 
motion respectively. When temperature of 
the system rises, these motions become 
more vigorous and entropy increases. On the 
other hand when temperature is lowered, the 
entropy decreases. The entropy of any pure 
crystalline substance approaches zero as 
the temperature approaches absolute zero. 
This is called third law of thermodynamics. 
This is so because there is perfect order in 
a crystal at absolute zero. The statement is 
confined to pure crystalline solids because 
theoretical arguments and practical evidences 
have shown that entropy of solutions and 
super cooled liquids is not zero at 0 K. The 
importance of the third law lies in the fact that 
it permits the calculation of absolute values 
of entropy of pure substance from thermal 
data alone. For a pure substance, this can 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 27 :
 chemIstry
162
Table 5.4  Effect of Temperature on Spontaneity of Reactions
∆rH	
∆rS	
     ∆rG	
Description*
–	
+	
–	
Reaction spontaneous at all temperatures
–	
–	
– (at low T )	
Reaction spontaneous at low temperature
–	
–	
+ (at high T )	
Reaction nonspontaneous at high temperature
+	
+	
+ (at low T )	
Reaction nonspontaneous at low temperature
+	
+	
– (at high T )	
Reaction spontaneous at high temperature
+	
–	
+ (at all T )	
Reaction nonspontaneous at all temperatures
*	 The term low temperature and high temperature are relative. For a particular reaction, high temperature could even mean 
room temperature.
be done by summing q
T
rev  increments from 0 
K to 298 K. Standard entropies can be used 
to calculate standard entropy changes by a 
Hess’s law type of calculation. 
5.7	
Gibbs energy change and 
equilibrium
We have seen how a knowledge of the sign 
and magnitude of the free energy change of a 
chemical reaction allows:
(i)	 Prediction of the spontaneity of the 
chemical reaction.
(ii)	 Prediction of the useful work that could 
be extracted from it.
So far we have considered free energy 
changes in irreversible reactions. Let us now 
examine the free energy changes in reversible 
reactions.
‘Reversible’ under strict thermodynamic 
sense is a special way of carrying out 
a process such that system is at all 
times in perfect equilibrium with its 
surroundings. When applied to a chemical 
reaction, the term ‘reversible’ indicates 
that a given reaction can proceed in either 
direction simultaneously, so that a dynamic 
equilibrium is set up. This means that the 
reactions in both the directions should 
proceed with a decrease in free energy, which 
seems impossible. It is possible only if at 
equilibrium the free energy of the system 
is minimum. If it is not, the system would 
spontaneously change to configuration of 
lower free energy.
So, the criterion for equilibrium 
A + B  C + D;   is
∆rG = 0
Gibbs energy for a reaction in which all 
reactants and products are in standard state,  
∆rG  is related to the equilibrium constant of 
the reaction as follows:
             0  =  ∆rG  + RT ln K
or     ∆rG   =  – RT ln K
or     ∆rG    =  – 2.303 RT log K                     (5.23)
We also know that
 	
     (5.24)
For strongly endothermic reactions, the 
value of ∆rH may be large and positive. In 
such a case, value of K will be much smaller  
than 1 and the reaction is unlikely to 
form much product. In case of exothermic 
reactions, ∆rH is large and negative, and ∆rG 
is likely to be large and negative too. In such 
cases, K will be much larger than 1. We may 
expect strongly exothermic reactions to have a 
large K, and hence can go to near completion. 
∆rG also depends upon ∆rS, if the changes 
in the entropy of reaction is also taken into 
account, the value of K or extent of chemical 
reaction will also be affected, depending upon 
whether ∆rS is positive or negative.
Using equation (5.24),
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 28 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 163
(i)	 It is possible to obtain an estimate of ∆G 
from the measurement of ∆H and ∆S, 
and then calculate K at any temperature 
for economic yields of the products.
(ii)	 If K is measured directly in the laboratory, 
value of ∆G at any other temperature 
can be calculated.
Using equation (5.24),
= 
–
.
.
.
13 6
10
2 303 8 314
298
3






J mol
JK
mol
K
–1
–1
–1
  
=   2.38
Hence K = antilog  2.38 = 2.4 × 102.
Problem 5.14
At 60°C, dinitrogen tetroxide is 50 
per cent dissociated. Calculate the 
standard free energy change at this 
temperature and at one atmosphere.
Solution 
N2O4(g) 
 2NO2(g)
If N2O4 is 50% dissociated, the mole 
fraction of both the substances is given 
by
x
x
N O
NO
2
4
2
1
0 5
1
0 5
2
0 5
1
0 5






.
. :
.
.
 
p
p
N O
NO
2
4
2
0 5
1 5
1
1
1 5
1




.
.
.
atm,
atm.
                          
The equilibrium constant Kp is given by
Kp =  
p
p
NO
N O
2
2
4



2
2
1 5
1 5
0 5
.
( . ) ( . )
=  1.33 atm.
Since	 	
∆rG = –RT ln Kp
	
∆rG = (– 8.314 JK–1 mol–1) × (333 K) 
	
                × (2.303) × (0.1239)
= – 763.8 kJ mol–1
Problem 5.12
Calculate ∆rG for conversion of oxygen 
to ozone, 3/2 O2(g) → O3(g) at 298 K. if Kp 
for this conversion is 2.47 × 10–29.
Solution 
We know ∆rG = – 2.303 RT log Kp and  
R = 8.314 JK–1 mol–1
Therefore, ∆rG =  
– 2.303 (8.314 J K–1 mol–1)                     	
                    × (298 K) (log 2.47 × 10–29)
= 163000 J mol–1
= 163 kJ mol–1.
Problem 5.13
Find out the value of equilibrium constant 
for the following reaction at 298 K.
 
Standard Gibbs energy change, ∆rG at 
the given temperature is –13.6 kJ mol–1.
Solution 
We know, log  K  = 	  
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 29 :
 chemIstry
164
Summary
Thermodynamics deals with energy changes in chemical or physical processes and enables us to 
study these changes quantitatively and to make useful predictions. For these purposes, we divide 
the universe into the system and the surroundings. Chemical or physical processes lead to evolution 
or absorption of heat (q), part of which may be converted into work (w). These quantities are related 
through the first law of thermodynamics via ∆U = q + w. ∆U,  change in internal energy, depends 
on initial and final states only and is a state function, whereas q and w depend on the path and 
are not the state functions. We follow sign conventions of q and w by giving the positive sign to 
these quantities when these are added to the system. We can measure the transfer of heat from one 
system to another which causes the change in temperature. The magnitude of rise in temperature 
depends on the heat capacity (C) of a substance. Therefore, heat absorbed or evolved is q =  C∆T. 
Work can be measured by w = –pex∆V, in case of expansion of gases. Under reversible process, we 
can put pex = p for infinitesimal changes in the volume making wrev = – p dV. In this condition, we 
can use gas equation, pV = nRT.
At constant volume, w = 0, then ∆U = qV , heat transfer at constant volume. But in study of 
chemical reactions, we usually have constant pressure. We define another state function enthalpy. 
Enthalpy change, ∆H = ∆U + ∆ngRT, can be found directly from the heat changes at constant pressure, 
∆H = qp.
There are varieties of enthalpy changes. Changes of phase such as melting, vaporization and 
sublimation usually occur at constant temperature and can be characterized by enthalpy changes 
which are always positive. Enthalpy of formation, combustion and other enthalpy changes can be 
calculated using Hess’s law. Enthalpy change for chemical reactions can be determined by



r
i
f
i
f
i
f
H
a
H
b
H







products
reactions
and in gaseous state by
∆rH =	 Σ bond enthalpies of the reactants – Σ bond enthalpies of the products
First law of thermodynamics does not guide us about the direction of chemical 
reactions i.e., what is the driving force of a chemical reaction. For isolated systems,  
∆U = 0. We define another state function, S, entropy for this purpose. Entropy is a measure 
of disorder or randomness. For a spontaneous change, total entropy change is positive. 
Therefore, for an isolated system, ∆U = 0, ∆S > 0, so entropy change distinguishes a spontaneous 
change, while energy change does not. Entropy changes can be measured by the equation 
∆S = 
qrev
T
 for a reversible process. 
qrev
T
 is independent of path.
Chemical reactions are generally carried at constant pressure, so we define another state function 
Gibbs energy, G, which is related to entropy and enthalpy changes of the system by the equation:
∆rG =	 ∆rH – T ∆rS
For a spontaneous change, ∆Gsys < 0 and at equilibrium, ∆Gsys = 0.
Standard Gibbs energy change is related to equilibrium constant by
∆rG = – RT ln K.
K can be calculated from this equation, if we know ∆rG which can be found from 
. Temperature is an important factor in the equation. Many reactions which 
are non-spontaneous at low temperature, are made spontaneous at high temperature for systems 
having positive entropy of reaction.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 30 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 165
Exercises
5.1	
Choose the correct answer. A thermodynamic state function is a quantity
	
(i)	
used to determine heat changes
	
(ii)	
whose value is independent of path
	
(iii)	 used to determine pressure volume work
	
(iv)	 whose value depends on temperature only.
5.2	
For the process to occur under adiabatic conditions, the correct condition is:
	
(i)	
∆T = 0
	
(ii)	
∆p = 0
	
(iii)	 q = 0
	
(iv)	 w = 0
5.3	
The enthalpies of all elements in their standard states are:
	
(i)	
unity
	
(ii)	
zero
	
(iii)	 < 0
	
(iv)	 different for each element
5.4	
∆U  of combustion of methane is – X kJ mol–1. The value of ∆H is
	
(i)	
= ∆U 
	
(ii)	
> ∆U 
	
(iii)	 < ∆U 
	
(iv)	 = 0
5.5	
The enthalpy of combustion of methane, graphite and dihydrogen at 298 K are, 
–890.3 kJ mol–1 –393.5 kJ mol–1, and –285.8 kJ mol–1 respectively. Enthalpy of 
formation of CH4(g) will be
	
(i)	
–74.8 kJ mol–1	
	
(ii)	 –52.27 kJ mol–1
	
(iii)	 +74.8 kJ mol–1	
	
(iv)	 +52.26 kJ mol–1.
5.6	
A reaction, A + B → C + D + q is found to have a positive entropy change. The 
reaction will be
	
(i)	
possible at high temperature
	
(ii)	
possible only at low temperature
	
(iii)	 not possible at any temperature
	
(v)	
possible at any temperature
5.7	
In a process, 701 J of heat is absorbed by a system and 394 J of work is done by 
the system. What is the change in internal energy for the process?
5.8	
The reaction of cyanamide, NH2CN (s), with dioxygen was carried out in a bomb 
calorimeter, and ∆U was found to be –742.7 kJ mol–1 at 298 K. Calculate enthalpy 
change for the reaction at 298 K.
	
NH2CN(g) + 3
2 O2(g) → N2(g) + CO2(g) + H2O(l)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 31 :
 chemIstry
166
5.9	
Calculate the number of kJ of heat necessary to raise the temperature of 
60.0 g of aluminium from 35°C to 55°C. Molar heat capacity of Al is 24 J mol–1 K–1.
5.10	
Calculate the enthalpy change on freezing of 1.0 mol of water at10.0°C to ice at 
–10.0°C.  ∆fusH = 6.03 kJ mol–1 at 0°C.
	
Cp [H2O(l)] = 75.3 J mol–1 K–1
	
Cp [H2O(s)] = 36.8 J mol–1 K–1
5.11	
Enthalpy of combustion of carbon to CO2 is –393.5 kJ mol–1. Calculate the heat 
released upon formation of 35.2 g of CO2 from carbon and dioxygen gas.
5.12	
Enthalpies of formation of CO(g), CO2(g), N2O(g) and N2O4(g) are –110, – 393, 81 
and 9.7 kJ mol–1 respectively. Find the value of ∆rH for the reaction:
	
N2O4(g) + 3CO(g) → N2O(g) + 3CO2(g)
5.13	
Given
	
N2(g) + 3H2(g) → 2NH3(g); ∆rH = –92.4 kJ mol–1
	
What is the standard enthalpy of formation of NH3 gas?
5.14	
Calculate the standard enthalpy of formation of CH3OH(l) from the following data:
	
CH3OH (l) + 3
2  O2(g) → CO2(g) + 2H2O(l) ; ∆rH = –726 kJ mol–1
	
C(graphite) + O2(g) → CO2(g) ; ∆cH = –393 kJ mol–1
	
H2(g) + 1
2  O2(g) → H2O(l); ∆f H =  –286 kJ mol–1.
5.15	
Calculate the enthalpy change for the process
	
CCl4(g) → C(g) + 4 Cl(g)
	
and calculate bond enthalpy of C – Cl in CCl4(g).
	
∆vapH(CCl4) = 30.5 kJ mol–1.
	
∆fH (CCl4) = –135.5 kJ mol–1.
	
∆aH (C) = 715.0 kJ mol–1, where ∆aH is enthalpy of atomisation
	
∆aH (Cl2) = 242 kJ mol–1
5.16	
For an isolated system, ∆U = 0, what will be ∆S ?
5.17	
For the reaction at 298 K,
	
2A + B → C
	
∆H = 400 kJ mol–1 and ∆S = 0.2 kJ K–1 mol–1
	
At what temperature will the reaction become spontaneous considering ∆H and ∆S 
to be constant over the temperature range.
5.18	
For the reaction,
	
2 Cl(g) → Cl2(g), what are the signs of ∆H and ∆S ?
5.19	
For the reaction
	
2 A(g) + B(g) → 2D(g)
	
∆U  = –10.5 kJ and ∆S = –44.1 JK–1.
	
Calculate ∆G for the reaction, and predict whether the reaction may occur 
spontaneously. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 32 :
 THERMODYNAMICS	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
 167
5.20	
The equilibrium constant for a reaction is 10. What will be the value of ∆G ? 
R = 8.314 JK–1 mol–1, T = 300 K.
5.21	
Comment on the thermodynamic stability of NO(g), given
	
1
2
 N2(g) + 1
2
O2(g) → NO(g);  ∆rH = 90 kJ mol–1
	
NO(g) + 1
2
O2(g) → NO2(g):  ∆rH= –74 kJ mol–1
5.22	
Calculate the entropy change in surroundings when 1.00 mol of H2O(l) is formed 
under standard conditions. ∆f H = –286 kJ mol–1.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 1 :
 Unit 6
Equilibrium
Chemical equilibria are important in numerous biological 
and environmental processes. For example, equilibria 
involving O2 molecules and the protein hemoglobin play 
a crucial role in the transport and delivery of O2 from 
our lungs to our muscles. Similar equilibria involving CO 
molecules and hemoglobin account for the toxicity of CO.
When a liquid evaporates in a closed container, 
molecules with relatively higher kinetic energy escape 
the liquid surface into the vapour phase and number of 
liquid molecules from the vapour phase strike the liquid 
surface and are retained in the liquid phase. It gives rise 
to a constant vapour pressure because of an equilibrium in 
which the number of molecules leaving the liquid equals the 
number returning to liquid from the vapour. We say that 
the system has reached equilibrium state at this stage. 
However, this is not static equilibrium and there is a lot of 
activity at the boundary between the liquid and the vapour. 
Thus, at equilibrium, the rate of evaporation is equal to the 
rate of condensation. It may be represented by
H2O (l)  
 H2O (vap)
The double half arrows indicate that the processes 
in both the directions are going on simultaneously. The 
mixture of reactants and products in the equilibrium state 
is called an equilibrium mixture.
Equilibrium can be established for both physical 
processes and chemical reactions. The reaction may be 
fast or slow depending on the experimental conditions and 
the nature of the reactants. When the reactants in a closed 
vessel at a particular temperature react to give products, 
the concentrations of the reactants keep on decreasing, 
while those of products keep on increasing for some time 
after which there is no change in the concentrations 
of either of the reactants or products. This stage of the 
system is the dynamic equilibrium and the rates of the 
forward and reverse reactions become equal. It is due to 
After studying this unit you will be 
able to 
•	
identify dynamic nature of 
equilibrium involved in physical 
and chemical processes;
•	
state the law of equilibrium; 
•	
explain characteristics of 
equilibria involved in physical 
and chemical processes;
•	
write expressions for equilibrium 
constants; 
•	
establish a relationship between 
Kp and Kc;
•	
explain various factors that 
affect the equilibrium state of a 
reaction;
•	
classify substances as acids or 
bases according to Arrhenius, 
Bronsted-Lowry and Lewis 
concepts;
•	
classify acids and bases as 
weak or strong in terms of their 
ionization constants; 
•	
explain the dependence of degree 
of ionization on concentration 
of the electrolyte and that of the 
common ion;
•	
describe pH scale for representing 
hydrogen ion concentration;
•	
explain ionisation of water and 
its duel role as acid and base;
•	
describe ionic product (Kw ) and 
pKw  for water;
•	
appreciate use of buffer 
solutions;
•	
calculate solubility product 
constant.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 2 :
 169
EQUILIBRIUM
this dynamic equilibrium stage that there is 
no change in the concentrations of various 
species in the reaction mixture. Based on the 
extent to which the reactions proceed to reach 
the state of chemical equilibrium, these may 
be classified in three groups.
(i)	
The reactions that proceed nearly 
to completion and only negligible 
concentrations of the reactants are 
left. In some cases, it may not be even 
possible to detect these experimentally.
(ii)	
The reactions in which only small 
amounts of products are formed and 
most of the reactants remain unchanged 
at equilibrium stage.
(iii)	 The reactions in which the concentrations 
of the reactants and products are 
comparable, when the system is in 
equilibrium.
The extent of a reaction in equilibrium 
varies with the experimental conditions such 
as concentrations of reactants, temperature, 
etc. Optimisation of the operational conditions 
is very important in industry and laboratory 
so that equilibrium is favorable in the 
direction of the desired product. Some 
important aspects of equilibrium involving 
physical and chemical processes are dealt in 
this unit along with the equilibrium involving 
ions in aqueous solutions which is called as 
ionic equilibrium.
6.1	
E Q U I L I B R I U M  I N  P H Y S I C A L 
PROCESSES
The characteristics of system at equilibrium 
are better understood if we examine some 
physical processes. The most familiar examples 
are phase transformation processes, e.g.,
	
solid    
    liquid 
	
liquid    
    gas
	
solid     
    gas
6.1.1	 Solid-Liquid Equilibrium
Ice and water kept in a perfectly insulated 
thermos flask (no exchange of heat between its 
contents and the surroundings) at 273K and 
the atmospheric pressure are in equilibrium 
state and the system shows interesting 
characteristic features. We observe that the 
mass of ice and water do not change with 
time and the temperature remains constant. 
However, the equilibrium is not static. 
The intense activity can be noticed at the 
boundary between ice and water. Molecules 
from the liquid water collide against ice and 
adhere to it and some molecules of ice escape 
into liquid phase. There is no change of mass 
of ice and water, as the rates of transfer of 
molecules from ice into water and of reverse 
transfer from water into ice are equal at 
atmospheric pressure and 273 K. 
It is obvious that ice and water are in 
equilibrium only at particular temperature 
and pressure. For any pure substance at 
atmospheric pressure, the temperature at 
which the solid and liquid phases are at 
equilibrium is called the normal melting point 
or normal freezing point of the substance.  The 
system here is in dynamic equilibrium and we 
can infer the following:
(i)	
Both the opposing processes occur 
simultaneously.
(ii)	
Both the processes occur at the same 
rate so that the amount of ice and water 
remains constant.
6.1.2	 Liquid-Vapour Equilibrium
This equilibrium can be better understood if 
we consider the example of a transparent box 
carrying a U-tube with mercury (manometer). 
Drying agent like anhydrous calcium chloride 
(or phosphorus penta-oxide) is placed for 
a few hours in the box. After removing the 
drying agent by tilting the box on one side, a 
watch glass (or petri dish) containing water 
is quickly placed inside the box. It will be 
observed that the mercury level in the right 
limb of the manometer slowly increases and 
finally attains a constant value, that is, the 
pressure inside the box increases and reaches 
a constant value. Also the volume of water in 
the watch glass decreases (Fig. 6.1). Initially 
there was no water vapour (or very less) inside 
the box. As water evaporated the pressure in 
the box increased due to addition of water 
molecules into the gaseous phase inside 
the box. The rate of evaporation is constant. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 3 :
 170
chemistry
However, the rate of increase in pressure 
decreases with time due to condensation 
of vapour into water. Finally it leads to an 
equilibrium condition when there is no net 
evaporation. This implies that the number 
of water molecules from the gaseous state 
into the liquid state also increases till the 
equilibrium is attained i.e.,
rate of evaporation= rate of condensation
H2O(l)     
     H2O (vap)
At equilibrium the pressure exerted by 
the water molecules at a given temperature 
remains constant and is called the equilibrium 
vapour pressure of water (or just vapour 
pressure of water); vapour pressure of water 
increases with temperature. If the above 
experiment is repeated with methyl alcohol, 
acetone and ether, it is observed that different 
liquids have different equilibrium vapour 
pressures at the same temperature, and the 
liquid which has a higher vapour pressure is 
more volatile and has a lower boiling point. 
If we expose three watch glasses containing 
separately 1mL each of acetone, ethyl alcohol, 
and water to atmosphere and repeat the 
experiment with different volumes of the 
liquids in a warmer room, it is observed 
that in all such cases the liquid eventually 
disappears and the time taken for complete 
evaporation depends on (i) the nature of the 
liquid, (ii) the amount of the liquid and (iii) the 
temperature. When the watch glass is open 
to the atmosphere, the rate of evaporation 
remains constant but the molecules are 
dispersed into large volume of the room. As 
a consequence the rate of condensation from 
vapour to liquid state is much less than the 
rate of evaporation. These are open systems 
and it is not possible to reach equilibrium in 
an open system.
Water and water vapour are in equilibrium 
position at atmospheric pressure (1.013 bar) 
and at 100°C in a closed vessel. The boiling 
point of water is 100°C at 1.013 bar pressure. 
For any pure liquid at one atmospheric 
pressure (1.013 bar), the temperature 
at which the liquid and vapours are at 
equilibrium is called normal boiling point of 
the liquid. Boiling point of the liquid depends 
on the atmospheric pressure. It depends on 
the altitude of the place; at high altitude the 
boiling point decreases. 
6.1.3	 Solid – Vapour Equilibrium
Let us now consider the systems where solids 
sublime to vapour phase. If we place solid 
iodine in a closed vessel, after sometime 
the vessel gets filled up with violet vapour 
and the intensity of colour increases with 
time. After certain time the intensity of 
colour becomes constant and at this stage 
equilibrium is attained. Hence solid iodine 
sublimes to give iodine vapour and the iodine 
vapour condenses to give solid iodine. The 
equilibrium can be represented as,
I2(solid)  
 I2 (vapour)
Other examples showing this kind of 
equilibrium are,
Camphor (solid) 
 Camphor (vapour)
NH4Cl (solid)  
 NH4Cl (vapour)
Fig. 6.1  Measuring equilibrium vapour pressure of water at a constant temperature
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 4 :
 171
EQUILIBRIUM
6.1.4	 Equilibrium Involving Dissolution 
of Solid or Gases in Liquids
Solids in liquids
We know from our experience that we can 
dissolve only a limited amount of salt or 
sugar in a given amount of water at room 
temperature. If we make a thick sugar syrup 
solution by dissolving sugar at a higher 
temperature, sugar crystals separate out if we 
cool the syrup to the room temperature. We call 
it a saturated solution when no more of solute 
can be dissolved in it at a given  temperature. 
The concentration of the solute in a saturated 
solution depends upon the temperature. In 
a saturated solution, a dynamic equilibrium 
exits between the solute molecules in the solid 
state and in the solution:
Sugar (solution) 
 Sugar (solid), and 
the rate of dissolution of sugar = rate of 
crystallisation of sugar.
Equality of the two rates and dynamic 
nature of equilibrium has been confirmed with 
the help of radioactive sugar. If we drop some 
radioactive sugar into saturated solution of 
non-radioactive sugar, then after some time 
radioactivity is observed both in the solution 
and in the solid sugar. Initially there were no 
radioactive sugar molecules in the solution 
but due to dynamic nature of equilibrium, 
there is exchange between the radioactive 
and non-radioactive sugar molecules between 
the two phases. The ratio of the radioactive 
to non-radioactive molecules in the solution 
increases till it attains a constant value.
Gases in liquids
When a soda water bottle is opened, some of 
the carbon dioxide gas dissolved in it fizzes 
out rapidly. The phenomenon arises due 
to difference in solubility of carbon dioxide 
at different pressures. There is equilibrium 
between the molecules in the gaseous state 
and the molecules dissolved in the liquid 
under pressure i.e.,
CO2 (gas) 
 CO2 (in solution)
This equilibrium is governed by Henry’s 
law, which states that the mass of a gas 
dissolved in a given mass of a solvent at 
any temperature is proportional to the 
pressure of the gas above the solvent. 
This amount decreases with increase of 
temperature. The soda water bottle is sealed 
under pressure of gas when its solubility in 
water is high. As soon as the bottle is opened, 
some of the dissolved carbon dioxide gas 
escapes to reach a new equilibrium condition 
required for the lower pressure, namely its 
partial pressure in the atmosphere. This is 
how the soda water in bottle when left open 
to the air for some time, turns ‘flat’. It can be 
generalised that:
(i)	
For solid 
 liquid equilibrium, there is 
only one temperature (melting point) at  
1 atm (1.013 bar) at which the two 
phases can coexist. If there is no 
exchange of heat with the surroundings, 
the mass of the two phases remains 
constant.
(ii)	
For liquid 
 vapour equilibrium, the 
vapour pressure is constant at a given 
temperature.
(iii)	 For dissolution of solids in liquids, 
the solubility is constant at a given 
temperature.
(iv)	
For dissolution of gases in liquids, 
the concentration of a gas in liquid 
is proportional to the pressure 
(concentration) of the gas over the liquid. 
These observations are summarised in 
Table 6.1
Table 6.1	
Some Features of Physical Equilibria
Process
Conclusion
Liquid
 Vapour
H2O (l) 
 H2O (g)
pH2Oconstant at given 
temperature
Solid 
 Liquid
H2O (s) 
 H2O (l)
Melting point is fixed at 
constant pressure
Solute(s) 
 Solute
(solution)
Sugar(s) 
 Sugar
(solution)
Concentration of solute
in solution is constant
at a given temperature
Gas(g) 
 Gas (aq)
CO2(g) 
 CO2(aq)
[gas(aq)]/[gas(g)] is 
constant at a given 
temperature  
[CO2(aq)]/[CO2(g)] is 
constant at a given 
temperature 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 5 :
 172
chemistry
6.1.5	 General Characteristics of 
Equilibria Involving Physical 
Processes
For the physical processes discussed above, 
following characteristics are common to the 
system at equilibrium:
(i)	
Equilibrium is possible only in a closed 
system at a given temperature.
(ii)	
Both the opposing processes occur at 
the same rate and there is a dynamic 
but stable condition.
(iii)	 All measurable properties of the system 
remain constant.
(iv)	
When equilibrium is attained for a 
physical process, it is characterised by 
constant value of one of its parameters 
at a given temperature. Table 6.1 lists 
such quantities.
(v)	
The magnitude of such quantities at any 
stage indicates the extent to which the 
physical process has proceeded before 
reaching equilibrium.
6.2	
EQUILIBRIUM IN CHEMICAL 
PROCESSES – DYNAMIC 
EQUILIBRIUM
Analogous to the physical systems chemical 
reactions also attain a state of equilibrium. 
These reactions can occur both in forward 
and backward directions. When the rates of 
the forward and reverse reactions become 
equal, the concentrations of the reactants 
and the products remain constant. This 
is the stage of chemical equilibrium. This 
equilibrium is dynamic in nature as it consists 
of a forward reaction in which the reactants 
give product(s) and reverse reaction in which 
product(s) gives the original reactants.
For a better comprehension, let us consider 
a general case of a reversible reaction, 
A + B 
 C + D
With passage of time, there is 
accumulation of the products C and D and 
depletion of the reactants A and B (Fig. 6.2). 
This leads to a decrease in the rate of 
forward reaction and an increase in the rate 
of the reverse reaction,
Fig. 6.2  Attainment of chemical equilibrium.
Eventually, the two reactions occur at the 
same rate and the system reaches a state of 
equilibrium. 
Similarly, the reaction can reach the state 
of equilibrium even if we start with only C and 
D; that is, no A and B being present initially, 
as the equilibrium can be reached from either 
direction.
The dynamic nature of chemical 
equilibrium can be demonstrated in the 
synthesis of ammonia by Haber’s process.  
In a series of experiments, Haber started 
with known amounts of dinitrogen and 
dihydrogen maintained at high temperature 
and pressure and at regular intervals 
determined the amount of ammonia present. 
He was successful in determining also the 
concentration of unreacted dihydrogen and 
dinitrogen. Fig. 6.4 (page 174) shows that after 
a certain time the composition of the mixture 
remains the same even though some of the 
reactants are still present. This constancy in 
composition indicates that the reaction has 
reached equilibrium. In order to understand 
the dynamic nature of the reaction, synthesis 
of ammonia is carried out with exactly the 
same starting conditions (of partial pressure 
and temperature) but using D2 (deuterium) 
in place of H2. The reaction mixtures starting 
either with H2 or D2 reach equilibrium with 
the same composition, except that D2 and 
ND3 are present instead of H2 and NH3.  After 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 6 :
 173
EQUILIBRIUM
Dynamic Equilibrium – A Student’s Activity
Equilibrium whether in a physical or in a chemical system, is always of dynamic nature. This can 
be demonstrated by the use of radioactive isotopes. This is not feasible in a school laboratory. 
However this concept can be easily comprehended by performing the following activity. The activity 
can be performed in a group of 5 or 6 students.
Take two 100mL measuring cylinders (marked as 1 and 2) and two glass tubes each of 
30 cm length. Diameter of the tubes may be same or different in the range of 3-5mm. Fill 
nearly half of the measuring cylinder-1 with coloured water (for this purpose add a crystal 
of potassium permanganate to water) and keep second cylinder (number 2) empty. 
Put one tube in cylinder 1 and second in cylinder 2. Immerse one tube in cylinder 1, 
close its upper tip with a finger and transfer the coloured water contained in its lower portion to 
cylinder 2. Using second tube, kept in 2nd cylinder, transfer the coloured water in a similar manner 
from cylinder 2 to cylinder 1. In this way keep on transferring coloured water using the two glass 
tubes from cylinder 1 to 2 and from 2 to 1 till you notice that the level of coloured water in both 
the cylinders becomes constant.
If you continue intertransferring coloured solution between the cylinders, there will not be 
any further change in the levels of coloured water in two cylinders. If we take analogy of ‘level’ of 
coloured water with ‘concentration’ of reactants and products in the two cylinders, we can say 
the process of transfer, which continues even after the constancy of level, is indicative of dynamic 
nature of the process. If we repeat the experiment taking two tubes of different diameters we find 
that at equilibrium the level of coloured water in two cylinders is different. How far diameters are 
responsible for change in levels in two cylinders? Empty cylinder (2) is an indicator of no product 
in it at the beginning. 
Fig.6.3 
Demonstrating dynamic nature of equilibrium. (a) initial stage (b) final stage after the 
equilibrium is attained.
1
2
1
2
(a)
(b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 7 :
 174
chemistry
2NH3(g) 
 N2(g) + 3H2(g) 
Similarly let us consider the reaction,  
H2(g) + I2(g) 
 2HI(g). If we start with 
equal initial concentration of H2 and I2, the 
reaction proceeds in the forward direction 
and the concentration of H2 and I2 decreases 
while that of HI increases, until all of these 
become constant at equilibrium (Fig. 6.5). We 
can also start with HI alone and make the 
reaction to proceed in the reverse direction; 
the concentration of HI will decrease and 
concentration of H2 and I2 will increase until 
they all become constant when equilibrium is 
reached (Fig. 6.5).  If total number of H and I 
atoms are same in a given volume, the same 
equilibrium mixture is obtained whether we 
start it from pure reactants or pure product.
equilibrium is attained, these two mixtures  
(H2, N2, NH3 and D2, N2, ND3) are mixed 
together and left for a while.  Later, when 
this mixture is analysed, it is found that the 
concentration of ammonia is just the same 
as before. However, when this mixture is 
analysed by a mass spectrometer, it is found 
that ammonia and all deuterium containing 
forms of ammonia (NH3, NH2D, NHD2 and 
ND3) and dihydrogen and its deutrated forms  
(H2, HD and D2) are present. Thus one can 
conclude that scrambling of H and D atoms in 
the molecules must result from a continuation 
of the forward and reverse reactions in the 
mixture. If the reaction had simply stopped 
when they reached equilibrium, then there 
would have been no mixing of isotopes in 
this way.
Use of isotope (deuterium) in the formation 
of ammonia clearly indicates that chemical 
reactions reach a state of dynamic 
equilibrium in which the rates of forward 
and reverse reactions are equal and there 
is no net change in composition.  
Equilibrium can be attained from both 
sides, whether we start reaction by taking, 
H2(g) and N2(g) and get NH3(g) or by taking 
NH3(g) and decomposing it into N2(g) and H2(g).
N2(g) + 3H2(g) 
 2NH3(g)  
Fig. 6.5 	Chemical equilibrium in the reaction H2(g) 
+ I2(g) 
 2HI(g) can be attained from 
either direction
Fig. 6.4	
Depiction of equilibrium for the reaction
6.3	
LAW OF CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM 
AND EQUILIBRIUM CONSTANT
A mixture of reactants and products in the 
equilibrium state is called an equilibrium 
mixture. In this section we shall address a 
number of important questions about the 
composition of equilibrium mixtures: What is 
the relationship between the concentrations 
of reactants and products in an equilibrium 
mixture? How can we determine equilibrium 
concentrations from initial concentrations? 
What factors can be exploited to alter the 
N
g
H
g
NH
g
2
2
3
3
2



2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 8 :
 175
EQUILIBRIUM
composition of an equilibrium mixture? The 
last question in particular is important when 
choosing conditions for synthesis of industrial 
chemicals such as H2, NH3, CaO etc.
To answer these questions, let us consider 
a general reversible reaction:
A + B 
 C + D
where A and B are the reactants, C and D 
are the products in the balanced chemical 
equation. On the basis of experimental studies 
of many reversible reactions, the Norwegian 
chemists Cato Maximillian Guldberg and 
Peter Waage proposed in 1864 that the 
concentrations in an equilibrium mixture 
are related by the following equilibrium 
equation, 
	
Kc 

C D
A
B
                        (6.1)
	
	
(6.1) where Kc is the equilibrium constant and 
the expression on the right side is called the 
equilibrium constant expression.
The equilibrium equation is also known as 
the law of mass action because in the early 
days of chemistry, concentration was called 
“active mass”. In order to appreciate their 
work better, let us consider reaction between 
gaseous H2 and I2 carried out in a sealed vessel 
at 731K.
	
H2(g)   +   I2(g) 
  2HI(g)
	
1 mol    1 mol          2 mol
Six sets of experiments with varying initial 
conditions were performed, starting with only 
gaseous H2 and I2 in a sealed reaction vessel 
in first four experiments (1, 2, 3 and 4) and 
only HI in other two experiments (5 and 6). 
Experiment 1, 2, 3 and 4 were performed 
taking different concentrations of H2 and / or 
I2, and with time it was observed that intensity 
of the purple colour remained constant and 
equilibrium was attained. Similarly, for 
experiments 5 and 6, the equilibrium was 
attained from the opposite direction.
Data obtained from all six sets of 
experiments are given in Table 6.2.
It is evident from the experiments 1, 2, 
3 and 4 that number of moles of dihydrogen 
reacted = number of moles of iodine reacted 
= ½ (number of moles of HI formed). Also, 
experiments 5 and 6 indicate that,
[H2(g)]eq = [I2(g)]eq
Knowing the above facts, in order 
to establish a relationship between 
concentrations of the reactants and products, 
several combinations can be tried. Let us 
consider the simple expression,
[HI(g)]eq / [H2(g)]eq [I2(g)]eq
It can be seen from Table 6.3 that if we 
put the equilibrium concentrations of the 
reactants and products, the above expression 
Table 6.2  Initial and Equilibrium Concentrations of H2, I2 and HI
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 9 :
 176
chemistry
is far from  constant. However, if we consider 
the expression,
[HI(g)]2
eq / [H2(g)]eq [I2(g)]eq
we find that this expression gives constant 
value (as shown in Table 6.3) in all the six 
cases. It can be seen that in this expression 
the power of the concentration for reactants 
and products are actually the stoichiometric 
coefficients in the equation for the chemical 
reaction. Thus, for the reaction H2(g) + I2(g) 
 
2HI(g), following equation 6.1, the equilibrium 
constant Kc is written as,
Kc  = [HI(g)]eq
2 / [H2(g)]eq [I2(g)]eq                   (6.2)
Generally the subscript ‘eq’ (used for 
equilibrium) is omitted from the concentration 
terms. It is taken for granted that the 
concentrations in the expression for Kc are 
equilibrium values. We, therefore, write,
Kc  = [HI(g)]2 / [H2(g)] [I2(g)]                 (6.3)
The subscript ‘c’ indicates that Kc is 
expressed in concentrations of mol L–1. 
At a given temperature, the product of 
concentrations of the reaction products 
raised to the respective stoichiometric 
coefficient in the balanced chemical 
equation divided by the product of 
concentrations of the reactants raised to 
their individual stoichiometric coefficients 
has a constant value. This is known as 
the Equilibrium Law or Law of Chemical 
Equilibrium.
The equilibrium constant for a general 
reaction,
a A   +  b B 
 c C  +  d D
is expressed as,
Kc  = [C]c[D]d / [A]a[B]b                                       (6.4)
where [A], [B], [C] and [D] are the equilibrium 
concentrations of the reactants and products.
Equilibrium constant for the reaction,
4NH3(g) + 5O2(g) 
 4NO(g) + 6H2O(g) is written 
as 
Kc  = [NO]4[H2O]6 / [NH3]4 [O2]5	
 
Molar concentration of different species is 
indicated by enclosing these in square bracket 
and, as mentioned above, it is implied that 
these are equilibrium concentrations. While 
writing expression for equilibrium constant, 
symbol for phases (s, l, g) are generally ignored. 
Let us write equilibrium constant for the 
reaction, H2(g) + I2(g) 
 2HI(g)               (6.5)
as,  Kc = [HI]2 / [H2] [I2] = x                (6.6)
The equilibrium constant for the reverse 
reaction, 2HI(g) 
 H2(g) + I2(g), at the same 
temperature is,
K′
c = [H2] [I2] / [HI]2 = 1/ x = 1 / Kc                (6.7)
Thus, K′
c = 1 / Kc                                                    (6.8)
Equilibrium constant for the reverse 
reaction is the inverse of the equilibrium 
constant for the reaction in the forward 
direction.
If we change the stoichiometric coefficients 
in a chemical equation by multiplying 
throughout by a factor then we must make 
sure that the expression for equilibrium 
constant also reflects that change. For 
example, if the  reaction (6.5) is written as,
½ H2(g) + ½ I2(g) 
 HI(g)                   (6.9)
the equilibrium constant for the above 
reaction is given by
K″c   =  [HI] / [H2]1/2[I2]1/2 = {[HI]2 / [H2][I2]}1/2 
                                = x1/2 = Kc
1/2	 (6.10)
On multiplying the equation (6.5) by n, we get
Table 6.3	
E x p r e s s i o n  I n v o l v i n g  t h e 
Equilibrium Concentration of 
Reactants 
H2(g) + I2(g)       2HI(g)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 10 :
 177
EQUILIBRIUM
nH2(g) +  nI2(g) D 
 2nHI(g)                 (6.11)
Therefore, equilibrium constant for the 
reaction is equal to Kc n. These findings are 
summarised in Table 6.4. It should be noted 
that because the equilibrium constants Kc 
and K′
c have different numerical values, it is 
important to specify the form of the balanced 
chemical equation when quoting the value of 
an equilibrium constant.
N2(g) + O2(g) 
 2NO(g)
Solution
For the reaction equilibrium constant, Kc 
can be written as,
Kc  = 
NO
= 
2.8
10 M
–3
2
2
2
2
3
3
3 0
10
4 2
10
N
O
M
M
.
.
=  0.622
Problem 6.1
The following concentrations were 
obtained for the formation of NH3 from 
N 2 and H 2 at equilibrium at 500K.  
[N2] = 1.5 × 10–2M. [H2] = 3.0 ×10–2 M and 
[NH3] = 1.2 ×10–2M. Calculate equilibrium 
constant.
Solution
The equilibrium constant for the reaction,
N2(g) + 3H2(g) 
 2NH3(g) can be written as,
Kc  = 
= 
NH
g
N
g
H
g
3
2
2
2
3
2 2
2
1 2
10
1 5
10

















.
.
3 0
10 2 3
.




     = 0.355 × 103 = 3.55 × 102
Problem 6.2
At equilibrium, the concentrations of 
N2=3.0 × 10–3M, O2 = 4.2 × 10–3M and  
NO= 2.8 × 10–3M in a sealed vessel at 800K. 
What will be Kc for the reaction 
Table 6.4	 Relations between Equilibrium 
Constants for a General Reaction 
and its Multiples.
Chemical equation	
	
  Equilibrium 
	
	
                  constant
a A + b B 
 c C + dD	
Kc
c C + d D 
 a A + b B	
K′
c =(1/Kc )
na A + nb B 
 ncC + ndD	
K′″
c  = (Kc
n)
6.4	
HOMOGENEOUS EQUILIBRIA
In a homogeneous system, all the reactants 
and products are in the same phase. 
For example, in the gaseous reaction,  
N2(g) + 3H2(g) 
 2NH3(g), reactants and 
products are in the homogeneous phase. 
Similarly, for the reactions,
CH3COOC2H5 (aq) + H2O (l) 
 CH3COOH (aq)   	
	
	
	
	
                + C2H5OH (aq)
and, Fe3+ (aq) + SCN–(aq) 
 Fe(SCN)2+ (aq)                                                                   
all the reactants and products are in 
homogeneous solution phase. We shall now 
consider equilibrium constant for some 
homogeneous reactions.
6.4.1	 Equilibrium Constant in Gaseous 
Systems
So far we have expressed equilibrium 
constant of the reactions in terms of molar 
concentration of the reactants and products, 
and used symbol, Kc for it. For reactions 
involving gases, however, it is usually more 
convenient to express the equilibrium 
constant in terms of partial pressure.
The ideal gas equation is written as,
pV = nRT 
⇒
p
n
V
T
=
R
Here, p is the pressure in Pa, n is the number 
of moles of the gas, V is the volume in m3 and 
T is the temperature in Kelvin
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 11 :
 178
chemistry
Therefore, 
n/V is concentration expressed  in mol/m3
If concentration c, is in mol/L or mol/dm3, 
and p is in bar then
p = cRT,
We can also write p = [gas]RT.
Here, R= 0.0831 bar litre/mol K
At constant temperature, the pressure of 
the gas is proportional to its concentration i.e.,
p ∝ [gas]
For reaction in equilibrium    	
H2(g) +  I2(g)  
  2HI(g)
We can write either
Kc
HI g
H
g
I
g
 = 
( )


( )


( )


2
2
2
or K
p
p
p
c
HI
H
I
 = 
(
)
(
)(
)
2
2
2
                             (6.12)
Further, since  p
T
                         p
HI
I
HI g
R
=
( )


2
2
2
2
=
( )


=
( )


I
g
R
H
g
R
H
T
                        p
T
Therefore,
 
K
p
p
p
T
T
p =
(
)
(
)(
)
( )

[
]
( )


( )


HI
H
I
g
g
g
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
 = 
HI
R
H
R
I
.
RT
	
= 
HI
H
I
g
g
g
( )


( )


( )


=
2
2
2
Kc              (6.13)
In this example, Kp = Kc i.e., both 
equilibrium constants are equal. However, 
this is not always the case. For example in 
reaction
N2(g)  +  3H2(g)  
  2NH3(g)
K p =
(
)
(
)(
)
p
p
p
NH
N
H
3
2
2
2
3
      
=
( )

[
]
( )


( )

(
)
NH
g
R
N
g
R
g
R
3
3
2
2
2
2
3
T
T
H
T
.
     
	
=
( )

[
]
( )


( )


=
(
)
−
−
NH
g
R
N
g
g
R
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
T
H
K
T
c
or K
K
T
p
c
=
(
)
−
R
2 	
	
	
 (6.14)
Similarly, for a general reaction
a A  +  b B   
   c C  +  d D
K
p
p
p
p
T
T
p
C
c
D
d
A
a
B
b
c
d
c d
a
b
a b
= (
)(
)
(
)(
)
= [ ] [ ] (
)
[ ] [ ] (
)
+
(
)
+
(
)
C
D
R
A
B
R
       
= [ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ] (
)
+
(
)−
+
(
)
C
D
A
B
R
c
d
a
b
c d
a b
T
      
        = [ ] [ ]
[ ] [ ] (
)
=
(
)
C
D
A
B
R
R
c
d
a
b
c
T
K
T
n
n
∆
∆    (6.15)
where ∆n = (number of moles of gaseous 
products) – (number of moles of gaseous 
reactants) in the balanced chemical equation.
It is necessary that while calculating the value 
of Kp, pressure should be expressed in bar 
because standard state for pressure is 1 bar. 
We know from Unit 1 that :
1pascal, Pa=1Nm–2, and 1bar = 105 Pa
Kp values for a few selected reactions at 
different temperatures are  given in Table 6.5
Table 6.5  Equilibrium Constants, Kp for   
         a Few Selected Reactions
Problem 6.3
PCl5, PCl3 and Cl2 are at equilibrium at 500 
K and having concentration 1.59M PCl3, 
1.59M Cl2 and 1.41 M PCl5. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 12 :
 179
EQUILIBRIUM
Calculate Kc for the reaction,
PCl5 
 PCl3 + Cl2
Solution
The equilibrium constant Kc for the above 
reaction can be written as,
Kc
PCl
Cl
PCl










3
2
5
2
1 59
1 41
1 79
.
.
.
Problem 6.4
The value of Kc = 4.24 at 800K for the 
reaction, 
CO (g) + H2O (g) 
 CO2 (g) + H2 (g)
Calculate equilibrium concentrations of CO2, 
H2, CO and H2O at 800 K, if only CO and 
H2O are present initially at concentrations 
of 0.10M each.
Solution
For the reaction,
    CO (g)  +    H2O (g) 
 CO2 (g) + H2 (g)
Initial concentration: 
     0.1M        0.1M	            0	
       0
Let x mole per litre of each of the product 
be formed.
At equilibrium:	
	
  
     (0.1-x) M     (0.1-x) M      x M	      x M
where x is the amount of CO2 and H2 at 
equilibrium.
Hence, equilibrium constant can be written 
as,
Kc = x2/(0.1-x)2 = 4.24
x2 = 4.24(0.01 + x2-0.2x)
x2 = 0.0424 + 4.24x2-0.848x
3.24x2 – 0.848x + 0.0424 = 0
a = 3.24, b = – 0.848, c = 0.0424
(for quadratic equation ax2 + bx + c = 0, 
x
b
b
ac
a






2
4
2
x =  0.848±√(0.848)2– 4(3.24)(0.0424)/
(3.24×2)
x = (0.848 ± 0.4118)/ 6.48 
x1 = (0.848 – 0.4118)/6.48 = 0.067
x2 = (0.848 + 0.4118)/6.48  = 0.194
the value 0.194 should be neglected because 
it will give concentration of the reactant 
which is more than initial concentration.
Hence the equilibrium concentrations are,
[CO2] = [H2-] = x = 0.067 M
[CO] = [H2O] = 0.1 – 0.067 = 0.033 M
Problem 6.5
For the equilibrium,
2NOCl(g) 
 2NO(g)  +  Cl2(g)
the value of the equilibrium constant, Kc is 
3.75 × 10–6 at 1069 K. Calculate the Kp for 
the reaction at this temperature?
Solution
We know that,
Kp = Kc(RT)∆n
For the above reaction,
∆n = (2+1) – 2 = 1
Kp = 3.75 ×10–6 (0.0831 × 1069)
Kp = 0.033 
6.5	
HETEROGENEOUS EQUILIBRIA
Equilibrium in a system having more than one 
phase is called heterogeneous equilibrium. 
The equilibrium between water vapour and 
liquid water in a closed container is an 
example of heterogeneous equilibrium.
H2O(l) 
 H2O(g)
In this example, there is a gas phase and 
a liquid phase. In the same way, equilibrium 
between a solid and its saturated solution,
Ca(OH)2 (s) + (aq) 
 Ca2+ (aq) + 2OH–(aq)
is a heterogeneous equilibrium.
Heterogeneous equilibria often involve 
pure solids or liquids. We can simplify 
equilibrium expressions for the heterogeneous 
equilibria involving a pure liquid or a pure 
solid, as the molar concentration of a pure 
solid or liquid is constant (i.e., independent 
of the amount present). In other words if a 
substance ‘X’ is involved, then [X(s)] and [X(l)] 
are constant, whatever the amount of ‘X’ is 
taken. Contrary to this, [X(g)] and [X(aq)] will 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 13 :
 180
chemistry
vary as the amount of X in a given volume 
varies. Let us take thermal dissociation of 
calcium carbonate which is an interesting and 
important example of heterogeneous chemical 
equilibrium.
CaCO3 (s) 
  CaO (s) + CO2 (g)     (6.16)
On the basis of the stoichiometric equation, 
we can write,
Kc 









CaO s
CO
g
CaCO
s
2
3
Since [CaCO3(s)] and [CaO(s)] are both 
constant, therefore modified equilibrium 
constant for the thermal decomposition of 
calcium carbonate will be
K´c = [CO2(g)]                                  (6.17)
 or Kp = pCO2                                                           (6.18)
This shows that at a particular 
temperature, there is a constant concentration 
or pressure of CO2 in equilibrium with CaO(s) 
and CaCO3(s). Experimentally it has been 
found that at 1100 K, the pressure of CO2 
in equilibrium with CaCO3(s) and CaO(s), is  
2.0 ×105 Pa. Therefore, equilibrium constant 
at 1100K for the above reaction is:
Kp = PCO2 = 2 × 105 Pa/105 Pa = 2.00
Similarly, in the equilibrium between 
nickel, carbon monoxide and nickel carbonyl 
(used in the purification of nickel),
Ni (s) + 4 CO (g)  
 Ni(CO)4 (g),
the equilibrium constant is written as
Kc 






Ni CO
CO
4
4
It must be remembered that for the 
existence of heterogeneous equilibrium pure 
solids or liquids must also be present (however 
small the amount may be) at equilibrium, but 
their concentrations or partial pressures do 
not appear in the expression of the equilibrium 
constant. In the reaction,
Ag2O(s) + 2HNO3(aq) 
 2AgNO3(aq) +H2O(l)
Kc  = AgNO3




2
3
2
HNO
Units of Equilibrium Constant
The value of equilibrium constant Kc can be 
calculated by substituting the concentration 
terms in mol/L and for Kp partial pressure 
is substituted in Pa, kPa, bar or atm. This 
results in units of equilibrium constant based 
on molarity or pressure, unless the exponents 
of both the numerator and denominator are 
same.
For the reactions,
H2(g) + I2(g) 
 2HI, Kc and Kp have no 
unit.
N2O4(g) 
 2NO2 (g), Kc has unit mol/L 
and Kp has unit bar
Equilibrium constants can also be 
expressed as dimensionless quantities if the 
standard state of reactants and products 
are specified. For a pure gas, the standard 
state is 1bar. Therefore a pressure of 4 bar 
in standard state can be expressed as 4 
bar/1 bar = 4, which is a dimensionless 
number. Standard state (c0) for a solute is 1 
molar solution and all concentrations can be 
measured with respect to it. The numerical 
value of equilibrium constant depends on the 
standard state chosen. Thus, in this system 
both Kp and Kc are dimensionless quantities 
but have different numerical values due to 
different standard states. 
Problem 6.6
The value of Kp for the reaction, 
CO2 (g) + C (s) 
 2CO (g)
is 3.0 at 1000 K. If initially PCO2 = 0.48 
bar and PCO = 0 bar and pure graphite is 
present, calculate the equilibrium partial 
pressures of CO and CO2.
Solution
For the reaction,
let ‘x’ be the decrease in pressure of CO2, 
then
           CO2(g)  +  C(s) 
 2CO(g)
Initial 	
  
pressure: 0.48 bar	 	
        0
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 14 :
 181
EQUILIBRIUM
At equilibrium:	
	
         
	 	
(0.48 – x)bar             2x bar
K p = p
p
CO
CO
2
2
Kp = (2x)2/(0.48 – x) = 3
4x2 = 3(0.48 – x)
4x2 = 1.44 – x
4x2 + 3x – 1.44 = 0
a = 4, b = 3, c = –1.44
x
b
b
ac
a






2
4
2
= [–3 ± √(3)2– 4(4)(–1.44)]/2 × 4
=  (–3 ± 5.66)/8
= (–3 + 5.66)/8 (as value of x cannot be 
negative hence we neglect that value)
x = 2.66/8 = 0.33
The equilibrium partial pressures are,
pCO2= 2x = 2 × 0.33 = 0.66 bar
pCO2= 0.48 – x = 0.48 – 0.33 = 0.15 bar
5.	 The equilibrium constant K for a reaction 
is related to the equilibrium constant 
of the corresponding reaction, whose 
equation is obtained by multiplying or 
dividing the equation for the original 
reaction by a small integer.
Let us consider applications of equilibrium 
constant to:
• 
predict the extent of a reaction on the 
basis of its magnitude,
• 
predict the direction of the reaction, and
• 
calculate equilibrium concentrations.
6.6.1	 Predicting the Extent of a 
Reaction
The numerical value of the equilibrium 
constant for a reaction indicates the extent 
of the reaction. But it is important to note 
that an equilibrium constant does not give 
any information about the rate at which 
the equilibrium is reached. The magnitude 
of Kc or Kp is directly proportional to the 
concentrations of products (as these appear 
in the numerator of equilibrium constant 
expression) and inversely proportional to the 
concentrations of the reactants (these appear 
in the denominator). This implies that a high 
value of K is suggestive of a high concentration 
of products and vice-versa.
We can make the following generalisations 
concerning the composition of equilibrium 
mixtures:
• 
If Kc > 103, products predominate over 
reactants, i.e., if Kc is very large, the 
reaction proceeds nearly to completion. 
Consider the following examples:
(a) 	The reaction of H2 with O2 at 500 K 
has a very large equilibrium constant,  
Kc = 2.4 × 1047.
(b) 	H2(g) + Cl2(g) 
 2HCl(g) at 300K has  
Kc = 4.0 × 1031. 
(c)	 H2(g) + Br2(g) 
 2HBr (g) at 300 K,  
Kc = 5.4 × 1018
• 
If Kc < 10–3, reactants predominate over 
products, i.e., if Kc is very small, the 
reaction proceeds rarely. Consider the 
following examples:
6.6	
APPLICATIONS OF EQUILIBRIUM 
CONSTANTS
Before considering the applications of 
equilibrium constants, let us summarise the 
important features of equilibrium constants 
as follows:
1.	 Expression for equilibrium constant is 
applicable only when concentrations of 
the reactants and products have attained 
constant value at equilibrium state.
2.	 The value of equilibrium constant is 
independent of initial concentrations of 
the reactants and products.
3.	 Equilibrium constant is temperature 
dependent having one unique value for 
a particular reaction represented by a 
balanced equation at a given temperature.
4.	 The equilibrium constant for the reverse 
reaction is equal to the inverse of the 
equilibrium constant for the forward 
reaction.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 15 :
 182
chemistry
(a) 	The decomposition of H2O into H2 and 
O2 at 500 K has a very small equilibrium 
constant, Kc = 4.1 × 10–48
(b)	 N2(g)  +  O2(g) 
 2NO(g),  
at 298 K has Kc = 4.8 ×10–31.
• 
If Kc is in the range of 10 – 3 to 103, 
appreciable concentrations of both 
reactants and products are present. 
Consider the following examples:
(a) 	For reaction of H2 with I2 to give HI, 
	
Kc = 57.0 at 700K.
(b) 	Also, gas phase decomposition of N2O4 
to NO2 is another reaction with a value 
of Kc = 4.64 × 10 –3 at 25°C which is 
neither too small nor too large. Hence, 
equilibrium mixtures contain appreciable 
concentrations of both N2O4 and NO2.
	
These generarlisations are illustrated in 
Fig. 6.6
If Qc = Kc, the reaction mixture is already 
at equilibrium.
Consider the gaseous reaction of H2 
with I2,
H2(g) + I2(g) 
 2HI(g); Kc = 57.0 at 700 K.
Suppose we have molar concentrations 
[H2]t=0.10M, [I2]t = 0.20 M and [HI]t = 0.40 M.
(the subscript t on the concentration symbols 
means that the concentrations were measured 
at some arbitrary time t, not necessarily at 
equilibrium). 
Thus, the reaction quotient, Qc at this 
stage of the reaction is given by,
Qc = [HI]t
2 / [H2]t [I2]t  = (0.40)2/ (0.10)×(0.20) 
                           = 8.0
Now, in this case, Qc (8.0) does not equal 
Kc (57.0), so the mixture of H2(g), I2(g) and HI(g) 
is not at equilibrium; that is, more H2(g) and 
I2(g) will react to form more HI(g) and their 
concentrations will decrease till Qc = Kc.
The reaction quotient, Qc is useful in 
predicting the direction of reaction by 
comparing the values of Qc and Kc.
Thus, we can make the following 
generalisations concerning the direction of 
the reaction (Fig. 6.7) :
Fig.6.6	
Dependence of extent of reaction on Kc 
6.6.2	 Predicting the Direction of the 
Reaction
The equilibrium constant helps in predicting 
the direction in which a given reaction will 
proceed at any stage. For this purpose, 
we calculate the reaction quotient Q. 
The reaction quotient, Q (Qc with molar 
concentrations and QP with partial pressures) 
is defined in the same way as the equilibrium 
constant Kc except that the concentrations 
in Qc are not necessarily equilibrium values.  
For a general reaction:
a A + b B  
  c C + d D	
	
      (6.19)
Qc = [C]c[D]d / [A]a[B]b		
     	
          (6.20)
Then, 
If Qc > Kc, the reaction will proceed in the 
direction of reactants (reverse reaction).
If Qc < Kc, the reaction will proceed in the 
direction of the products (forward reaction).
Fig. 6.7  Predicting the direction of the reaction
• 
If Qc < Kc, net reaction goes from left to 
right
• 
If Qc > Kc, net reaction goes from right to 
left.
• 
If Qc = Kc, no net reaction occurs.
Problem 6.7
The value of Kc for the reaction
2A 
 B + C is 2 × 10–3. At a given time, 
the composition of reaction mixture is  
[A] = [B] = [C] = 3 × 10–4 M. In which direction 
the reaction will proceed?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 16 :
 183
EQUILIBRIUM
The total pressure at equilbrium was 
found to be 9.15 bar. Calculate Kc, Kp and 
partial pressure at equilibrium.
Solution
We know pV = nRT
Total volume (V ) = 1 L
Molecular mass of N2O4 = 92 g
Number of moles = 13.8g/92 g = 0.15 
of the gas (n)
Gas constant (R) = 0.083 bar L mol–1K–1
Temperature (T ) = 400 K
pV = nRT
p × 1L = 0.15 mol × 0.083 bar L mol–1K–1  	
	 	
	
	
	
     × 400 K
p = 4.98 bar 
	 	
	
	
N2O4               2NO2
Initial pressure:   4.98 bar               0 	      
At equilibrium:  (4.98 – x) bar     2x bar	
Hence,
ptotal at equilibrium = pN2O4 + pNO2 
9.15 = (4.98 – x)  +  2x
9.15 = 4.98  +  x
x = 9.15 – 4.98  =  4.17 bar
Partial pressures at equilibrium are,
pN2O4 = 4.98 – 4.17 = 0.81bar
pNO2 = 2x = 2 × 4.17 = 8.34 bar
K
p
p
p
NO
N O
 = 
2
2
4
2

/
 
      = (8.34)2/0.81 = 85.87
Kp   = Kc(RT)∆n
85.87 = Kc(0.083 × 400)1
Kc = 2.586 = 2.6
Problem 6.9
3.00 mol of PCl5 kept in 1L closed reaction 
vessel was allowed to attain equilibrium 
at 380K. Calculate composition of the 
mixture at equilibrium. Kc= 1.80
Solution
                    PCl5 
 PCl3  +   Cl2
Initial    
concentration:  3.0	 	
   0	
     0
Solution
For the reaction the reaction quotient Qc is 
given by,
Qc = [B][C]/ [A]2
as [A] = [B] = [C] = 3 × 10–4M
Qc = (3 ×10–4)(3 × 10–4) / (3 ×10–4)2 = 1
as Qc > Kc so the reaction will proceed in the 
reverse direction.
6.6.3	 Calculating  Equilibrium 
Concentrations
In case of a problem in which we know the 
initial concentrations but do not know any of 
the equilibrium concentrations, the following 
three steps shall be followed:
Step 1. Write the balanced equation for the 
reaction.
Step 2. Under the balanced equation, make 
a table that lists for each substance involved 
in the reaction:
(a)	 the initial concentration,
(b)	 the change in concentration on going to 
equilibrium, and
(c)	 the equilibrium concentration.
In constructing the table, define x as the 
concentration (mol/L) of one of the substances 
that reacts on going to equilibrium, then use 
the stoichiometry of the reaction to determine 
the concentrations of the other substances in 
terms of x.
Step 3. Substitute the equilibrium 
concentrations into the equilibrium equation 
for the reaction and solve for x. If you are 
to solve a quadratic equation choose the 
mathematical solution that makes chemical 
sense.
Step 4. Calculate the equilibrium 
concentrations from the calculated value of x.
Step 5. Check your results by substituting 
them into the equilibrium equation.
Problem 6.8
13.8g of N2O4 was placed in a 1L reaction 
vessel at 400K and allowed to attain 
equilibrium
N2O4 (g) 
2NO2 (g)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 17 :
 184
chemistry
Let x mol per litre of PCl5 be dissociated,
At equilibrium:	
	 	
	
(3-x) 	 	
   x	
      x
Kc = [PCl3][Cl2]/[PCl5]
1.8 = x2/ (3 – x)
x2 + 1.8x – 5.4 = 0
x = [–1.8 ± √(1.8)2 – 4(–5.4)]/2
x = [–1.8 ± √3.24 + 21.6]/2
x = [–1.8 ± 4.98]/2
x = [–1.8 + 4.98]/2 = 1.59
[PCl5] = 3.0 – x = 3 –1.59 = 1.41 M
[PCl3] = [Cl2] = x = 1.59 M
Taking antilog of both sides, we get,
	
	
K = e–∆G/RT         	
	
      (6.23)
Hence, using the equation (6.23), the 
reaction spontaneity can be interpreted in 
terms of the value of ∆G .
• 
If ∆G  < 0, then –∆G /RT is positive, 
and e –∆DG /RT>1, making K >1, which 
implies a spontaneous reaction or the 
reaction which proceeds in the forward 
direction to such an extent that the 
products are present predominantly.
• 
If ∆G  > 0, then –∆G /RT is negative, and  
e –∆G </RT 1, that is , K < 1, which implies 
a non-spontaneous reaction or a reaction 
which proceeds in the forward direction 
to such a small degree that only a very 
minute quantity of product is formed.
Problem 6.10
The value of ∆G  for the phosphorylation of 
glucose in glycolysis is 13.8 kJ/mol. Find 
the value of Kc at 298 K.
Solution
∆G  = 13.8 kJ/mol = 13.8 × 103J/mol
Also, ∆G  = – RT lnKc
Hence, ln Kc = –13.8 × 103J/mol 	 	
	
	 	
	
(8.314 J mol–1K–1 × 298 K)
ln Kc = – 5.569
Kc = e–5.569
Kc = 3.81 × 10–3
Problem 6.11
Hydrolysis of sucrose gives,
Sucrose + H2O 
 Glucose + Fructose
Equilibrium constant Kc for the reaction is 
2 ×1013 at 300K. Calculate ∆G  at 300K.
Solution
∆G  = – RT lnKc
∆G  = – 8.314J mol–1K–1×  
	 	
	
     	
300K × ln(2×1013)
∆G  = – 7.64 ×104 J mol–1
6.8	
FACTORS AFFECTING EQUILIBRIA
One of the principal goals of chemical 
synthesis is to maximise the conversion of the 
6.7	
Relationship between 
Equilibrium Constant K, 
Reaction Quotient Q and  
Gibbs Energy G
The value of Kc for a reaction does not depend 
on the rate of the reaction. However, as you 
have studied in Unit 5, it is directly related  
to the thermodynamics of the reaction and  
in particular, to the change in Gibbs energy, 
∆G. If,
• 
∆G is negative, then the reaction is 
spontaneous and proceeds in the forward 
direction.
• 
∆G is positive, then reaction is considered 
non-spontaneous. Instead, as reverse 
reaction would have a negative ∆G, the 
products of the forward reaction shall be 
converted to the reactants.
• 
∆G is 0, reaction has achieved equilibrium; 
at this point, there is no longer any free 
energy left to drive the reaction.
A mathematical expression of this 
thermodynamic view of equilibrium can be 
described by the following equation:
∆G  = ∆G + RT lnQ                                    (6.21)
where, G is standard Gibbs energy. 
At equilibrium, when ∆G = 0 and Q = Kc, 
the equation (6.21) becomes,
∆G = ∆G + RT ln K = 0
∆G = – RT lnK                                      (6.22)
lnK = – ∆G / RT
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 18 :
 185
EQUILIBRIUM
Fig. 6.8	
Effect of addition of H2 on change 
of concentration for the reactants 
and products in the reaction,  
H2(g) + I2 (g) 
 2HI(g)
reactants to products while minimising the 
expenditure of energy. This implies maximum 
yield of products at mild temperature and 
pressure conditions. If it does not happen, 
then the experimental conditions need to be 
adjusted. For example, in the Haber process 
for the synthesis of ammonia from N2 and 
H2, the choice of experimental conditions is 
of real economic importance. Annual world 
production of ammonia is about hundred 
million tones, primarily for use as fertilisers.
Equilibrium constant, Kc is independent 
of initial concentrations. But if a system at 
equilibrium is subjected to a change in the 
concentration of one or more of the reacting 
substances, then the system is no longer at 
equilibrium; and net reaction takes place in 
some direction until the system returns to 
equilibrium once again. Similarly, a change 
in temperature or pressure of the system may 
also alter the equilibrium. In order to decide 
what course the reaction adopts and make 
a qualitative prediction about the effect of a 
change in conditions on equilibrium we use 
Le Chatelier’s principle. It states that a 
change in any of the factors that determine 
the equilibrium conditions of a system 
will cause the system to change in such a 
manner so as to reduce or to counteract 
the effect of the change. This is applicable 
to all physical and chemical equilibria. 
We shall now be discussing factors which 
can influence the equilibrium.
6.8.1	 Effect of Concentration Change
In general, when equilibrium is disturbed 
by the addition/removal of any reactant/
products, Le Chatelier’s principle predicts 
that:
•	
The concentration stress of an added 
reactant/product is relieved by net 
reaction in the direction that consumes 
the added substance.
•	
The concentration stress of a removed 
reactant/product is relieved by net 
reaction in the direction that replenishes 
the removed substance.
	
or in other words,
	
“When the concentration of any of the 
reactants or products in a reaction at 
equilibrium is changed, the composition 
of the equilibrium mixture changes so as 
to minimize the effect of concentration 
changes”.
	
Let us take the reaction,
H2(g) + I2(g) 
 2HI(g)
If H2 is added to the reaction mixture 
at equilibrium, then the equilibrium of the 
reaction is disturbed. In order to restore it, 
the reaction proceeds in a direction wherein 
H2 is consumed, i.e.,  more of H2 and I2 react 
to form HI and finally the equilibrium shifts 
in right (forward) direction (Fig.6.8). This is in 
accordance with the Le Chatelier’s principle 
which implies that in case of addition of a 
reactant/product, a new equilibrium will 
be set up in which the concentration of the 
reactant/product should be less than what it 
was after the addition but more than what it 
was in the original mixture.
The same point can be explained in terms 
of the reaction quotient, Qc,
Qc = [HI]2/ [H2][I2]
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 19 :
 186
chemistry
Addition of hydrogen at equilibrium 
results in value of Qc being less than Kc . Thus, 
in order to attain equilibrium again reaction 
moves in the forward direction. Similarly, 
we can say that removal of a product also 
boosts the forward reaction and increases 
the concentration of the products and this 
has great commercial application in cases 
of reactions, where the product is a gas or a 
volatile substance. In case of manufacture of 
ammonia, ammonia is liquified and removed 
from the reaction mixture so that reaction 
keeps moving in forward direction. Similarly, 
in the large scale production of CaO (used 
as important building material) from CaCO3, 
constant removal of CO2 from the kiln drives 
the reaction to completion. It should be 
remembered that continuous removal of a 
product maintains Qc at a value less than Kc 
and reaction continues to move in the forward 
direction.
Effect of Concentration – An experiment
This can be demonstrated by the following 
reaction: 
Fe3+(aq)+ SCN–(aq) 
 [Fe(SCN)]2+(aq)        (6.24)
yellow      colourless      deep red
 	
      (6.25)
A reddish colour appears on adding two 
drops of 0.002 M potassium thiocynate solution 
to 1 mL of 0.2 M iron(III) nitrate solution due 
to the formation of [Fe(SCN)]2+. The intensity 
of the red colour becomes constant on 
attaining equilibrium. This equilibrium can be 
shifted in either forward or reverse directions 
depending on our choice of adding a reactant 
or a product. The equilibrium can be shifted 
in the opposite direction by adding reagents 
that remove Fe3+ or SCN– ions. For example, 
oxalic acid (H2C2O4), reacts with Fe3+ ions 
to form the stable complex ion [Fe(C2O4)3]3–, 
thus decreasing the concentration of free 
Fe3+(aq). In accordance with the Le Chatelier’s 
principle, the concentration stress of removed 
Fe3+ is relieved by dissociation of [Fe(SCN)]2+ 
to replenish the Fe3+ ions. Because the 
concentration of [Fe(SCN)]2+ decreases, the 
intensity of red colour decreases.
Addition of aq. HgCl2 also decreases red 
colour because Hg2+ reacts with SCN– ions to 
form stable complex ion [Hg(SCN)4]2–. Removal 
of free SCN– (aq) shifts the equilibrium 
in equation (6.24) from right to left to 
replenish SCN– ions.  Addition of potassium 
thiocyanate on the other hand increases the 
colour intensity of the solution as it shift the 
equilibrium to right.
6.8.2	 Effect of Pressure Change
A pressure change obtained by changing the 
volume can affect the yield of products in 
case of a gaseous reaction where the total 
number of moles of gaseous reactants and 
total number of moles of gaseous products are 
different. In applying Le Chatelier’s principle 
to a heterogeneous equilibrium the effect 
of pressure changes on solids and liquids 
can be ignored because the volume (and 
concentration) of a solution/liquid is nearly 
independent of pressure.
Consider the reaction,
CO(g) + 3H2(g) 
 CH4(g) + H2O(g)
Here, 4 mol of gaseous reactants (CO + 3H2) 
become 2 mol of gaseous products (CH4 + 
H2O). Suppose equilibrium mixture (for above 
reaction) kept in a cylinder fitted with a piston 
at constant temperature is compressed to 
one half of its original volume. Then, total 
pressure will be doubled (according to  
pV = constant). The partial pressure and 
therefore, concentration of reactants and 
products have changed and the mixture is no 
longer at equilibrium. The direction in which 
the reaction goes to re-establish equilibrium 
can be predicted by applying the Le Chatelier’s 
principle. Since pressure has doubled, 
the equilibrium now shifts in the forward 
direction, a direction in which the number 
of moles of the gas or pressure decreases (we 
know pressure is proportional to moles of the 
gas). This can also be understood by using 
reaction quotient, Qc. Let [CO], [H2], [CH4] 
and [H2O] be the molar concentrations at 
equilibrium for methanation reaction. When 
volume of the reaction mixture is halved, the 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 20 :
 187
EQUILIBRIUM
Fig. 6.9	 Effect of temperature on equilibrium for 
the reaction, 2NO2 (g) 
 N2O4 (g)
partial pressure and the concentration are 
doubled. We obtain the reaction quotient by 
replacing each equilibrium concentration by 
double its value.
Qc =
( )


( )


( )


( )


CH
g
H O g
CO g
H
g
4
2
2
3
As Qc < Kc , the reaction proceeds in the 
forward direction.
In reaction C(s) + CO2(g) 
 2CO(g), when 
pressure is increased, the reaction goes in the 
reverse direction because the number of moles 
of gas increases in the forward direction.
6.8.3	 Effect of Inert Gas Addition
If the volume is kept constant and an inert gas 
such as argon is added which does not take 
part in the reaction, the equilibrium remains 
undisturbed. It is because the addition of 
an inert gas at constant volume does not 
change the partial pressures or the molar 
concentrations of the substance involved in 
the reaction. The reaction quotient changes 
only if the added gas is a reactant or product 
involved in the reaction.
6.8.4	 Effect of Temperature Change
Whenever an equilibrium is disturbed by 
a change in the concentration, pressure or 
volume, the composition of the equilibrium 
mixture changes because the reaction 
quotient, Qc no longer equals the equilibrium 
constant, Kc. However, when a change in 
temperature occurs, the value of equilibrium 
constant, Kc  is changed.
In general, the temperature dependence 
of the equilibrium constant depends on the 
sign of ∆H for the reaction.
• 
The equilibrium constant for an exothermic 
reaction (negative ∆H) decreases as the 
temperature increases.
• 
The equilibrium constant for an 
endothermic reaction (positive ∆H) 
increases as the temperature increases.
Temperature changes affect the 
equilibrium constant and rates of reactions. 
Production of ammonia according to the 
reaction,
N2(g) + 3H2(g) 
 2NH3(g); 
∆H= – 92.38 kJ mol–1
is an exothermic process. According to  
Le Chatelier’s principle, raising the 
temperature shifts the equilibrium to left 
and decreases the equilibrium concentration 
of ammonia. In other words, low temperature 
is favourable for high yield of ammonia, but 
practically very low temperatures slow down 
the reaction and thus a catalyst is used.
Effect of Temperature – An experiment
Effect of temperature on equilibrium can 
be demonstrated by taking NO2 gas (brown 
in colour) which dimerises into N2O4 gas 
(colourless).
2NO2(g) 
 N2O4(g); ∆H = –57.2 kJ mol–1
NO2 gas prepared by addition of Cu 
turnings to conc. HNO3 is collected in two  
5 mL test tubes (ensuring same intensity 
of colour of gas in each tube) and stopper 
sealed with araldite. Three 250 mL beakers 
1, 2 and 3 containing freesing mixture, water 
at room temperature and hot water (363K), 
respectively, are taken (Fig. 6.9). Both the test 
tubes are placed in beaker 2 for 8-10 minutes. 
After this one is placed in beaker 1 and the 
other in beaker  3. The effect of temperature 
on direction of reaction is depicted very well 
in this experiment. At low temperatures in 
beaker 1, the forward reaction of formation of 
N2O4 is preferred, as reaction is exothermic, 
and thus, intensity of brown colour due 
to NO2 decreases. While in beaker 3, high 
temperature favours the reverse reaction of 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 21 :
 188
chemistry
formation of NO2 and thus, the brown colour 
intensifies.
Effect of temperature can also be seen in 
an endothermic reaction,
[Co(H2O)6]3+(aq) + 4Cl–(aq)
[CoCl4 ]2–(aq) +  	
                                                               6H2O(l)
	pink	
 colourless	
blue
At room temperature, the equilibrium 
mixture is blue due to [CoCl4]2–. When cooled 
in a freesing mixture, the colour of the mixture 
turns pink due to [Co(H2O)6]3+.
6.8.5	 Effect of a Catalyst
A catalyst increases the rate of the chemical 
reaction by making available a new low energy 
pathway for the conversion of reactants to 
products. It increases the rate of forward 
and reverse reactions that pass through the 
same transition state and does not affect 
equilibrium. Catalyst lowers the activation 
energy for the forward and reverse reactions 
by exactly the same amount. Catalyst does 
not affect the equilibrium composition of 
a reaction mixture. It does not appear in 
the balanced chemical equation or in the 
equilibrium constant expression.
Let us consider the formation of NH3 
from dinitrogen and dihydrogen which is 
highly exothermic reaction and proceeds 
with decrease in total number of moles 
formed as compared to the reactants. 
Equilibrium constant decreases with increase 
in temperature. At low temperature rate 
decreases and it takes long time to reach at 
equilibrium, whereas high temperatures give 
satisfactory rates but poor yields. 
German chemist, Fritz Haber discovered 
that a catalyst consisting of iron catalyse 
the reaction to occur at a satisfactory rate 
at temperatures, where the equilibrium 
concentration of NH3 is reasonably favourable. 
Since the number of moles formed in the 
reaction is less than those of reactants, the 
yield of NH3 can be improved by increasing 
the pressure.
Optimum conditions of temperature 
and pressure for the synthesis of NH3 using 
catalyst are around 500°C and 200 atm.
Similarly, in manufacture of sulphuric 
acid by contact process,
2SO2(g) + O2(g) 
 2SO3(g);  Kc = 1.7 × 1026
though the value of K is suggestive of reaction 
going to completion, but practically the 
oxidation of SO2 to SO3 is very slow. Thus, 
platinum or divanadium penta-oxide (V2O5) 
is used as catalyst to increase the rate of the 
reaction.
Note: If a reaction has an exceedingly small 
K, a catalyst would be of little help.
6.9	
IONIC EQUILIBRIUM IN SOLUTION
Under the effect of change of concentration 
on the direction of equilibrium, you have 
incidently come across with the following 
equilibrium which involves ions:
Fe3+(aq) + SCN–(aq) 
 [Fe(SCN)]2+(aq)
There are numerous equilibria that involve 
ions only. In the following sections we will 
study the equilibria involving ions. It is well 
known that the aqueous solution of sugar 
does not conduct electricity. However, when 
common salt (sodium chloride) is added 
to water it conducts electricity. Also, the 
conductance of electricity increases with an 
increase in concentration of common salt. 
Michael Faraday classified the substances 
into two categories based on their ability 
to conduct electricity. One category of 
substances conduct electricity in their 
aqueous solutions and are called electrolytes 
while the other do not and are thus, referred to 
as non-electrolytes. Faraday further classified 
electrolytes into strong and weak electrolytes. 
Strong electrolytes on dissolution in water 
are ionized almost completely, while the weak 
electrolytes are only partially dissociated.  
For example, an aqueous solution of 
sodium chloride is comprised entirely of 
sodium ions and chloride ions, while that  
of acetic acid mainly contains unionized  
acetic acid molecules and only some acetate 
ions and hydronium ions. This is because  
there is almost 100% ionization in case 
of sodium chloride as compared to less  
than 5% ionization of acetic acid which is  
a weak electrolyte. It should be noted  
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 22 :
 189
EQUILIBRIUM
Fig.6.10	 Dissolution of sodium chloride in water. 
Na+ and Cl– ions are stablised by their 
hydration with polar water molecules.
that in weak electrolytes, equilibrium is 
established between ions and the unionized 
molecules. This type of equilibrium involving 
ions in aqueous solution is called ionic 
equilibrium. Acids, bases and salts come 
under the category of electrolytes and may act 
as either strong or weak electrolytes.
6.10	 ACIDS, BASES AND SALTS
Acids, bases and salts find widespread 
occurrence in nature. Hydrochloric acid 
present in the gastric juice is secreted by the 
lining of our stomach in a significant amount 
of 1.2-1.5 L/day and is essential for digestive 
 processes. Acetic acid is known to be the main 
constituent of vinegar. Lemon and orange 
juices contain citric and ascorbic acids, and 
tartaric acid is found in tamarind paste. As 
most of the acids taste sour, the word “acid” 
has been derived from a latin word “acidus” 
meaning sour. Acids are known to turn blue 
litmus paper into red and liberate dihydrogen 
on reacting with some metals. Similarly, bases 
are known to turn red litmus paper blue, taste 
bitter and feel soapy. A common example 
of a base is washing soda used for washing 
purposes. When acids and bases are mixed 
in the right proportion they react with each 
other to give salts. Some commonly known 
examples of salts are sodium chloride, barium 
sulphate, sodium nitrate.  Sodium chloride 
(common salt) is an important component of 
our diet and is formed by reaction between 
hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide. It 
exists in solid state as a cluster of positively 
charged sodium ions and negatively charged 
chloride ions which are held together due to 
electrostatic interactions between oppositely 
charged species (Fig.6.10). The electrostatic 
forces between two charges are inversely 
proportional to dielectric constant of the 
medium. Water, a universal solvent, possesses 
a very high dielectric constant of 80. Thus, 
when sodium chloride is dissolved in water, 
the electrostatic interactions are reduced by 
a factor of 80 and this facilitates the ions to 
move freely in the solution. Also, they are 
well-separated due to hydration with water 
molecules. 
Faraday was born near London into a family of very limited means. At the age of 
14 he was an apprentice to a kind bookbinder who allowed Faraday to read the 
books he was binding. Through a fortunate chance he became laboratory assistant 
to Davy, and during 1813-4, Faraday accompanied him to the Continent.  During 
this trip he gained much from the experience of coming into contact with many of the 
leading scientists of the time.  In 1825, he succeeded Davy as Director of the Royal 
Institution laboratories, and in 1833 he also became the first Fullerian Professor of 
Chemistry. Faraday’s first important work was on analytical chemistry. After 1821 
much of his work was on electricity and magnetism and different electromagnetic 
phenomena. His ideas have led to the establishment of modern field theory. 
He discovered his two laws of electrolysis in 1834. Faraday was a very modest and kind hearted 
person.  He declined all honours and avoided scientific controversies. He preferred to work alone and 
never had any assistant. He disseminated science in a variety of ways including his Friday evening 
discourses, which he founded at the Royal Institution.  He has been very famous for his Christmas 
lecture on the ‘Chemical History of a Candle’.  He published nearly 450 scientific papers.
Michael Faraday
(1791–1867)
Comparing, the ionization of hydrochloric 
acid with that of acetic acid in water we find 
that though both of them are polar covalent 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 23 :
 190
chemistry
molecules, former is completely ionized into 
its constituent ions, while the latter is only 
partially ionized (< 5%). The extent to which 
ionization occurs depends upon the strength 
of the bond and the extent of solvation 
of ions produced. The terms dissociation 
and ionization have earlier been used with 
different meaning. Dissociation refers to the 
process of separation of ions in water already 
existing as such in the solid state of the solute, 
as in sodium chloride. On the other hand, 
ionization corresponds to a process in which 
a neutral molecule splits into charged ions in 
the solution. Here, we shall not distinguish 
between the two and use the two terms 
interchangeably. 
6.10.1	 Arrhenius Concept of Acids and 
Bases
According to Arrhenius theory, acids are 
substances that dissociates in water to 
give hydrogen ions H+(aq) and bases are 
substances that produce hydroxyl ions 
OH –(aq). The ionization of an acid HX (aq) can 
be represented by the following equations:
HX (aq) → H+(aq) + X– (aq)
or
HX(aq) + H2O(l) → H3O+(aq) + X –(aq)
A bare proton, H+ is very reactive and 
cannot exist freely in aqueous solutions. 
Thus, it bonds to the oxygen atom of a solvent 
water molecule to give trigonal pyramidal 
hydronium ion, H3O+ {[H (H2O)]+} (see box). In 
this chapter we shall use H+(aq) and H3O+(aq) 
interchangeably to mean the same i.e., a 
hydrated proton. 
Similarly, a base molecule like MOH 
ionizes in aqueous solution according to the 
equation:
MOH(aq) → M+(aq) + OH–(aq)
The hydroxyl ion also exists in the hydrated 
form in the aqueous solution. Arrhenius 
concept of acid and base, however, suffers 
from the limitation of being applicable only to 
aqueous solutions and also, does not account 
for the basicity of substances like, ammonia 
which do not possess a hydroxyl group.
6.10.2	 The Brönsted-Lowry Acids and 
Bases
The Danish chemist, Johannes Brönsted and 
the English chemist, Thomas M. Lowry gave 
a more general definition of acids and bases. 
According to Brönsted-Lowry theory, acid 
is a substance that is capable of donating a 
hydrogen ion H+ and bases are substances 
capable of accepting a hydrogen ion, H+. In 
short, acids are proton donors and bases are 
proton acceptors. 
Consider the example of dissolution of NH3 
in H2O represented by the following equation:
Hydronium and Hydroxyl Ions
Hydrogen ion by itself is a bare proton with very 
small size (~10–15 m radius) and intense electric 
field, binds itself with the water molecule at 
one of the two available lone pairs on it giving 
H3O+. This species has been detected in many 
compounds (e.g., H3O+Cl–) in the solid state. In 
aqueous solution the hydronium ion is further 
hydrated to give species like H5O2
+, H7O3
+ and 
H9O4
+. Similarly the hydroxyl ion is hydrated 
to give several ionic species like H3O2
–, H5O3
– 
and H7O4
– etc.
The basic solution is formed due to the 
presence of hydroxyl ions. In this reaction, 
water molecule acts as proton donor and 
ammonia molecule acts as proton acceptor 
and are thus, called Lowry-Brönsted acid and 
H9O4
+
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 24 :
 191
EQUILIBRIUM
Arrhenius was born near Uppsala, Sweden. He presented his thesis, on the 
conductivities of electrolyte solutions, to the University of Uppsala in 1884.  For the 
next five years he travelled extensively and visited a number of research centers 
in Europe. In 1895 he was appointed professor of physics at the newly formed 
University of Stockholm, serving its rector from 1897 to 1902.  From 1905 until his 
death he was Director of physical chemistry at the Nobel Institute in Stockholm.  He 
continued to work for many years on electrolytic solutions.  In 1899 he discussed 
the temperature dependence of reaction rates on the basis of an equation, now 
usually known as Arrhenius equation.
He worked in a variety of fields, and made important contributions to 
immunochemistry, cosmology, the origin of life, and the causes of ice age. He was 
the first to discuss the ‘green house effect’ calling by that name. He received Nobel 
Prize in Chemistry in 1903 for his theory of electrolytic dissociation and its use in 
the development of chemistry.
base, respectively. In the reverse reaction, 
H+ is transferred from NH4
+ to OH–. In this 
case, NH4
+ acts as a Bronsted acid while 
OH– acted as a Brönsted base. The acid-base 
pair that differs only by one proton is called 
a conjugate acid-base pair. Therefore, OH– 
is called the conjugate base of an acid H2O 
and NH4
+ is called conjugate acid of the base 
NH3. If Brönsted acid is a strong acid then 
its conjugate base is a weak base and vice-
versa. It may be noted that conjugate acid 
has one extra proton and each conjugate base 
has one less proton.
Consider the example of ionization of 
hydrochloric acid in water. HCl(aq) acts as 
an acid by donating a proton to H2O molecule 
which acts as a base.
in case of ammonia it acts as an acid by 
donating a proton.
Problem 6.12
What will be the conjugate bases for the 
following Brönsted acids: HF, H2SO4 and 
HCO3
– ?
Solution
The conjugate bases should have one 
proton less in each case and therefore the 
corresponding conjugate bases are: F –, 
HSO4
– and CO3
2– respectively.
Problem 6.13
Write the conjugate acids for the following 
Brönsted bases: NH2
–, NH3 and HCOO–.
Solution
The conjugate acid should have one extra 
proton in each case and therefore the 
corresponding conjugate acids are: NH3, 
NH4
+ and HCOOH respectively.
Problem 6.14
The species: H2O, HCO3
–, HSO4
– and NH3 can 
act both as Bronsted acids and bases. For 
each case give the corresponding conjugate 
acid and conjugate base.
Solution
The answer is given in the following Table:
Species	
    Conjugate	     Conjugate 
	
	
        acid	
         base
H2O	 	
	
H3O+	 	
OH–
HCO3
–		
	
H2CO3		
CO3
2–
HSO4
–		
	
H2SO4		
SO4
2–
NH3	 	
	
NH4
+	
	
NH2
–
Svante Arrhenius
(1859-1927)
It can be seen in the above equation, that 
water acts as a base because it accepts the 
proton. The species H3O+ is produced when 
water accepts a proton from HCl. Therefore, 
Cl– is a conjugate base of HCl and HCl is the 
conjugate acid of base Cl –. Similarly, H2O is 
a conjugate base of an acid H3O+ and H3O+ is 
a conjugate acid of base H2O.
It is interesting to observe the dual role 
of water as an acid and a base. In case of 
reaction with HCl water acts as a base while 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 25 :
 192
chemistry
6.10.3	 Lewis Acids and Bases
G.N. Lewis in 1923 defined an acid as a 
species which accepts electron pair and base 
which donates an electron pair. As far as bases 
are concerned, there is not much difference 
between Brönsted-Lowry and Lewis concepts, 
as the base provides a lone pair in both the 
cases. However, in Lewis concept many 
acids do not have proton. A typical example 
is reaction of electron deficient species BF3 
with NH3.
BF3 does not have a proton but still acts 
as an acid and reacts with NH3 by accepting 
its lone pair of electrons. The reaction can be 
represented by,
BF3 + :NH3 → BF3:NH3
Electron deficient species  like AlCl3, Co3+, 
Mg2+, etc.  can act as Lewis acids while species 
like H2O, NH3, OH– etc. which can donate a 
pair of electrons, can act as Lewis bases.
Problem 6.15
Classify the following species into Lewis 
acids and Lewis bases and show how these 
act as such:
(a) HO–	
(b) F – 	      (c) H+ 	
(d) BCl3
Solution 
(a)	 Hydroxyl ion is a Lewis base as it can 
donate an electron lone pair (:OH– ).
(b)	 Flouride ion acts as a Lewis base 
as it can donate any one of its four 
electron lone pairs.
(c)	
A proton is a Lewis acid as it can 
accept a lone pair of electrons from 
bases like hydroxyl ion and fluoride 
ion.
(d) 	 BCl3 acts as a Lewis acid as it can 
accept a lone pair of electrons from 
species like ammonia or amine 
molecules.
6.11	 IONIZATION OF ACIDS AND BASES
Arrhenius concept of acids and bases 
becomes useful in case of ionization of acids 
and bases as mostly ionizations in chemical 
and biological systems occur in aqueous 
medium. Strong acids like perchloric acid 
(HClO4), hydrochloric acid (HCl), hydrobromic 
acid (HBr), hyrdoiodic acid (HI), nitric acid 
(HNO3) and sulphuric acid (H2SO4) are termed 
strong because they are almost completely 
dissociated into their constituent ions in an 
aqueous medium, thereby acting as proton 
(H+) donors. Similarly, strong bases like 
lithium hydroxide (LiOH), sodium hydroxide 
(NaOH), potassium hydroxide (KOH), caesium 
hydroxide (CsOH) and barium hydroxide 
Ba(OH)2 are almost completely dissociated 
into ions in an aqueous medium giving 
hydroxyl ions, OH–. According to Arrhenius 
concept they are strong acids and bases as 
they are able to completely dissociate and 
produce H3O+
 and OH– ions respectively in 
the medium. Alternatively, the strength of an 
acid or base may also be gauged in terms of 
Brönsted-Lowry concept of acids and bases, 
wherein a strong acid means a good proton 
donor and a strong base implies a good proton 
acceptor. Consider, the acid-base dissociation 
equilibrium of a weak acid HA,
HA(aq)  +  H2O(l) 
  H3O+(aq)  +  A–(aq)
                                     conjugate    conjugate
acid	
        base              acid            base
In section 6.10.2 we saw that acid (or 
base) dissociation equilibrium is dynamic 
involving a transfer of proton in forward and 
reverse directions. Now, the question arises 
that if the equilibrium is dynamic then with 
passage of time which direction is favoured? 
What is the driving force behind it? In order 
to answer these questions we shall deal 
into the issue of comparing the strengths 
of the two acids (or bases) involved in the 
dissociation equilibrium. Consider the two 
acids HA and H3O+ present in the above 
mentioned acid-dissociation equilibrium. 
We have to see which amongst them is a 
stronger proton donor. Whichever exceeds 
in its tendency of donating a proton over the 
other shall be termed as the stronger acid 
and the equilibrium will shift in the direction 
of weaker acid. Say, if HA is a stronger acid 
than H3O+, then HA will donate protons and 
not H3O+, and the solution will mainly contain 
A– and H3O+ ions. The equilibrium moves in 
the direction of formation of weaker acid 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 26 :
 193
EQUILIBRIUM
and weaker base because the stronger acid 
donates a proton to the stronger base.	
It follows that as a strong acid dissociates 
completely in water, the resulting base formed 
would be very weak i.e., strong acids have 
very weak conjugate bases. Strong acids 
like perchloric acid (HClO4), hydrochloric acid 
(HCl), hydrobromic acid (HBr), hydroiodic acid 
(HI), nitric acid (HNO3) and sulphuric acid 
(H2SO4) will give conjugate base ions ClO4
–, Cl, 
Br–, I–, NO3
– and HSO4
– , which are much weaker 
bases than H2O. Similarly a very strong base 
would give a very weak conjugate acid. On the 
other hand, a weak acid say HA is only partially 
dissociated in aqueous medium and thus, the 
solution mainly contains undissociated HA 
molecules. Typical weak acids are nitrous 
acid (HNO2), hydrofluoric acid (HF) and acetic 
acid (CH3COOH). It should be noted that the 
weak acids have very strong conjugate bases. 
For example, NH2
–, O 2– and H– are very good 
proton acceptors and thus, much stronger 
bases than H2O. 
Certain water soluble organic compounds 
like phenolphthalein and bromothymol blue 
behave as weak acids and exhibit different 
colours in their acid (HIn) and conjugate base 
(In– ) forms.
HIn(aq)  +   H2O(l)   
  H3O+(aq)   +   In–(aq)  
acid	
	
	
 conjugate  conjugate
indicator	
	
      acid           base
colour A	
	
	
            colour B
Such compounds are useful as indicators 
in acid-base titrations, and finding out H+ ion 
concentration.
6.11.1	 The Ionization Constant of Water 
and its Ionic Product
Some substances like water are unique in 
their ability of acting both as an acid and a 
base. We have seen this in case of water in 
section 6.10.2. In presence of an acid, HA it 
accepts a proton and acts as the base while 
in the presence of a base, B– it acts as an 
acid by donating a proton. In pure water, one 
H2O molecule donates proton and acts as an 
acid and another water molecules accepts a 
proton and acts as a base at the same time.  
The following equilibrium exists:
H2O(l)  +  H2O(l)  
   H3O+(aq)  +   OH–(aq)
acid        base         conjugate       conjugate
	
	
                        acid                base
The dissociation constant is represented by,
K = [H3O+] [OH–] / [H2O]                    (6.26)
The concentration of water is omitted from 
the denominator as water is a pure liquid and 
its concentration remains constant. [H2O] is 
incorporated within the equilibrium constant 
to give a new constant, Kw, which is called the 
ionic product of water. 
	
Kw = [H+][OH–]	
	
	
         (6.27)
The concentration of H+ has been found 
out experimentally as 1.0 × 10–7 M at 298 K. 
And, as dissociation of water produces equal 
number of H+ and OH– ions, the concentration 
of hydroxyl ions, [OH–] = [H+] = 1.0 × 10–7 M. 
Thus, the value of Kw at 298K,
Kw = [H3O+][OH–] = (1 × 10–7)2 = 1 × 10–14 M2 
(6.28)
The value of Kw is temperature dependent 
as it is an equilibrium constant.
The density of pure water is 1000 g / L 
and its molar mass is 18.0 g /mol. From this 
the molarity of pure water can be given as,
[H2O] = (1000 g /L)(1 mol/18.0 g) = 55.55 M. 
Therefore, the ratio of dissociated water to 
that of undissociated water can be given as:
10–7 / (55.55) = 1.8 × 10–9 or  ~ 2 in 10–9 (thus, 
equilibrium lies mainly towards undissociated 
water)
We can distinguish acidic, neutral and 
basic aqueous solutions by the relative values 
of the H3O+ and OH– concentrations:
Acidic: [H3O+] > [OH– ]
Neutral: [H3O+] = [OH– ]
Basic : [H3O+] < [OH–]
6.11.2	 The pH Scale
Hydronium ion concentration in molarity is 
more conveniently expressed on a logarithmic 
scale known as the pH scale. The pH of a 
solution is defined as the negative logarithm 
to base 10 of the activity aH

 of hydrogen 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 27 :
 194
chemistry
ion. In dilute solutions (< 0.01 M), activity 
of hydrogen ion (H+) is equal in magnitude 
to molarity represented by [H+]. It should  
be noted that activity has no units and is 
defined as:
  = [H+] / mol L–1
From the definition of pH, the following 
can be written,
pH = – log aH+ = – log {[H+] / mol L–1}
Thus, an acidic solution of HCl (10–2 M) 
will have a pH = 2. Similarly, a basic solution 
of NaOH having [OH–] =10–4 M and [H3O+] =  
10–10 M will have a pH = 10. At 25 °C, pure 
water has a concentration of hydrogen ions, 
[H+] = 10–7 M. Hence, the pH of pure water is 
given as:
pH = –log(10–7) = 7
Acidic solutions possess a concentration 
of hydrogen ions, [H+] > 10–7 M, while basic 
solutions possess a concentration of hydrogen 
ions, [H+] < 10–7 M. thus, we can summarise 
that
Acidic solution has pH < 7
Basic solution has pH > 7
Neutral solution has pH = 7
Now again, consider the equation (6.28) 
at 298 K
Kw = [H3O+] [OH–] = 10–14
Taking negative logarithm on both sides 
of equation, we obtain
–log Kw = – log {[H3O+] [OH–]} 
             = – log [H3O+] – log [OH–] 
            = – log 10 –14
	
  pKw  =   pH  +  pOH   =   14             (6.29)
Note that although Kw may change 
with temperature the variations in pH with 
temperature are so small that we often  
ignore it.
pKw is a very important quantity for 
aqueous solutions and controls the relative 
concentrations of hydrogen and hydroxyl 
ions as their product is a constant. It should 
be noted that as the pH scale is logarithmic, 
a change in pH by just one unit also means 
change in [H+] by a factor of 10. Similarly, 
when the hydrogen ion concentration, [H+] 
changes by a factor of 100, the value of pH 
changes by 2 units. Now you can realise why 
the change in pH with temperature is often 
ignored.
Measurement of pH of a solution is very 
essential as its value should be known 
when dealing with biological and cosmetic 
applications. The pH of a solution can be 
found roughly with the help of pH paper that 
has different colour in solutions of different 
pH. Now-a-days pH paper is available with 
four strips on it. The different strips have 
different colours (Fig. 6.11) at the same pH. 
The pH in the range of 1-14 can be determined 
with an accuracy of ~0.5 using pH paper. 
Fig.6.11	 pH-paper with four strips that may have 
different colours at the same pH
For greater accuracy pH meters are used. 
pH meter is a device that measures the  
pH-dependent electrical potential of the test 
solution within 0.001 precision. pH meters 
of the size of a writing pen are now available 
in the market. The pH of some very common 
substances are given in Table 6.5 (page 195).
Problem 6.16
The concentration of hydrogen ion in a 
sample of soft drink is 3.8 × 10–3M. what 
is its pH ?
Solution
pH = – log[3.8 × 10–3] 
      = – {log[3.8] + log[10–3]}
      = – {(0.58) + (– 3.0)} = – { – 2.42} = 2.42
Therefore, the pH of the soft drink is 2.42 
and it can be inferred that it is acidic.
Problem 6.17  
Calculate pH of a 1.0 × 10 –8 M solution of 
HCl.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 28 :
 195
EQUILIBRIUM
Table 6.6	
The Ionization Constants of Some 
Selected Weak Acids (at 298K)
	
Acid	
Ionization Constant,
	
	 	
Ka
Hydrofluoric Acid (HF)	
3.5 × 10–4
Nitrous Acid (HNO2)	
4.5 × 10–4
Formic Acid (HCOOH)	
1.8 × 10–4
Niacin (C5H4NCOOH)	
1.5 × 10–5
Acetic Acid (CH3COOH)	
1.74 × 10–5
Benzoic Acid (C6H5COOH)	
6.5 × 10–5
Hypochlorous Acid (HCIO)	
3.0 × 10–8
Hydrocyanic Acid (HCN)	
4.9 × 10–10
Phenol (C6H5OH)	
1.3 × 10–10
Solution    
2H2O (l)  
 H3O+ (aq)  +  OH–(aq)	
Kw = [OH–][H3O+] 
     = 10–14
Let, x = [OH–] = [H3O+] from H2O.  The 
H3O+ concentration is generated (i) from  
the ionization of HCl dissolved i.e., 
HCl(aq)  + H2O(l) 
 H3O+ (aq)  +  Cl –(aq),  
and (ii) from ionization of H2O. In these very 
dilute solutions, both sources of H3O+ must 
be considered:
[H3O+] = 10–8 + x
Kw = (10–8 + x)(x) = 10–14 
or x2 + 10–8 x – 10–14 = 0
[OH– ] = x = 9.5 × 10–8
So, pOH = 7.02 and pH = 6.98
6.11.3	 Ionization Constants of Weak Acids
Consider a weak acid HX that is partially 
ionized in the aqueous solution. The 
equilibrium can be expressed by:
HX(aq) + H2O(l) 
 H3O+(aq) + X–(aq)
Initial 
concentration (M)
c                                0               0
Let α be the extent of ionization
Change (M)	
-cα                 +cα               +cα
Equilibrium concentration (M)	
c-cα                  cα                cα	
Here, c = initial concentration of the 
undissociated acid, HX at time, t = 0. α = 
extent up to which HX is ionized into ions. 
Using these notations, we can derive the 
equilibrium constant for the above discussed 
acid-dissociation equilibrium:
Ka = c2α2 / c(1-α) = cα2 / 1-α
Ka is called the dissociation or ionization 
constant of acid HX. It can be represented 
alternatively in terms of molar concentration 
as follows,
	
  Ka = [H+][X–] / [HX]	
 	
      (6.30)
At a given temperature T, Ka is a 
measure of the strength of the acid HX i.e., 
larger the value of Ka, the stronger is the 
acid. Ka is a dimensionless quantity with 
the understanding that the standard state 
concentration of all species is 1M.
The values of the ionization constants 
of some selected weak acids are given in  
Table 6.6.
Table 6.5  The pH of Some Common Substances
	Name of the Fluid	
pH	
Name of the Fluid	
pH
Saturated solution of NaOH	
~15	
Black Coffee	
5.0
0.1 M NaOH solution	
13	
Tomato juice	
~4.2
Lime water	
10.5	
Soft drinks and vinegar	
~3.0
Milk of magnesia	
10	
Lemon juice	
~2.2	
Egg white, sea water	
7.8	
Gastric juice	
~1.2
Human blood	
7.4	
1M HCl solution	
~0
Milk	
	
6.8	
Concentrated HCl	
~–1.0
Human Saliva	
6.4	
The pH scale for the hydrogen ion 
concentration has been so useful that besides 
pKw, it has been extended to other species and 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 29 :
 196
chemistry
quantities. Thus, we have:
pKa = –log (Ka)                                   (6.31)
Knowing the ionization constant, Ka 
of an acid and its initial concentration, c, 
it is possible to calculate the equilibrium 
concentration of all species and also the 
degree of ionization of the acid and the pH of 
the solution.
A general step-wise approach can be 
adopted to evaluate the pH of the weak 
electrolyte as follows:
Step 1. The species present before 
dissociation are identified as Brönsted-Lowry  
acids/bases.
Step 2. Balanced equations for all possible 
reactions i.e., with a species acting both as 
acid as well as base are written.
Step 3. The reaction with the higher Ka is 
identified as the primary reaction whilst the 
other is a subsidiary reaction.
Step 4.  Enlist in a tabular form the following 
values for each of the species in the primary 
reaction
(a)	
Initial concentration, c.
(b)	
Change in concentration on proceeding 
to equilibrium in terms of α, degree of 
ionization.
(c)	
Equilibrium concentration.
Step 5. Substitute equilibrium concentrations 
into equilibrium constant equation for 
principal reaction and solve for α.
Step 6.  Calculate the concentration of species 
in principal reaction.
Step 7.  Calculate pH = – log[H3O+]
The above mentioned methodology has 
been elucidated in the following examples.
Solution 
The following proton transfer reactions are 
possible:
1) HF + H2O 
 H3O+ + F– 	
                                          Ka = 3.2 × 10–4
2) H2O + H2O 
 H3O+ + OH–	
                                        Kw = 1.0 × 10–14
As Ka >> Kw, [1] is the principle reaction.
	         HF  +     H2O  
  H3O+   +     F–
Initial 
concentration (M)     
             0.02                         0             0     
Change (M)     
             –0.02α                +0.02α    +0.02α
Equilibrium 
concentration  (M)
            0.02 – 0.02 α       0.02 α    0.02α
Substituting equilibrium concentrations 
in the equilibrium reaction for principal 
reaction gives:
Ka = (0.02α)2 / (0.02 – 0.02α) 
= 0.02 α2 / (1 –α) = 3.2 × 10–4
We obtain the following quadratic equation:
α2 + 1.6 × 10–2α – 1.6 × 10–2 = 0
The quadratic equation in α can be solved 
and the two values of the roots are:
α = + 0.12 and – 0.12
The negative root is not acceptable and 
hence,
α = 0.12
This means that the degree of ionization, 
α = 0.12, then equilibrium concentrations 
of other species viz., HF, F – and H3O+ are 
given by:
[H3O+] = [F –] = cα = 0.02 × 0.12 
                             = 2.4 × 10–3 M
[HF] = c(1 – α) = 0.02 (1 – 0.12) 
= 17.6 × 10-3 M 
pH = – log[H+] = –log(2.4 × 10–3) = 2.62
Problem 6.19
The pH of 0.1M monobasic acid is 4.50. 
Calculate the concentration of species H+, A– 
Problem 6.18
The ionization constant of HF is  
3.2 × 10–4. Calculate the degree of 
dissociation of HF in its 0.02 M solution. 
Calculate the concentration of all species 
present (H3O+, F – and HF) in the solution 
and its pH.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 30 :
 197
EQUILIBRIUM
Table 6.7	
The Values of the Ionization 
Constant of Some Weak Bases at 
298 K
	
Base	
Kb
	 Dimethylamine, (CH3)2NH	
5.4 × 10–4
	 Triethylamine, (C2H5)3N	
6.45 × 10–5
	 Ammonia, NH3 or NH4OH	
1.77 × 10–5
	 Quinine, (A plant product)	
1.10 × 10–6
	 Pyridine, C5H5N	
1.77 × 10–9
	 Aniline, C6H5NH2	
4.27 × 10–10
	 Urea, CO (NH2)2	
1.3 × 10–14
and HA at equilibrium. Also, determine the 
value of Ka and pKa of the monobasic acid. 
Solution    
pH = – log [H+]
Therefore, [H+] = 10 –pH = 10–4.50 
                                     = 3.16 × 10–5 
[H+] = [A–] = 3.16 × 10–5
Thus, 	
 Ka = [H+][A-] / [HA] 
[HA]eqlbm = 0.1 – (3.16 × 10-5)   0.1
Ka = (3.16 × 10–5)2 / 0.1 = 1.0 × 10–8
pKa = – log(10–8) = 8
Alternatively, “Percent dissociation” is 
another useful method for measure of 
strength of a weak acid and is given as:
Percent dissociation 
= [HA]dissociated/[HA]initial × 100%            (6.32)
Problem 6.20
Calculate the pH of 0.08M solution of 
hypochlorous acid, HOCl. The ionization 
constant of the acid is 2.5 × 10–5. Determine 
the percent dissociation of HOCl.
Solution
HOCl(aq) + H2O (l)  
 H3O+(aq) + ClO–(aq)
Initial concentration  (M)   	
  0.08		
               0               0
Change to reach
equilibrium concentration  
(M) 
    – x		
	
+ x  	
	
+x
equilibrium concentartion  (M)
0.08 – x	
	
   x 	
        	   x
Ka = {[H3O+][ClO–] / [HOCl]} 
     =  x2 / (0.08 –x)
As x << 0.08, therefore 0.08 – x  0.08
x2 / 0.08 = 2.5 × 10–5	
x2 = 2.0 × 10–6, thus, x = 1.41 × 10–3	
[H+] = 1.41 × 10–3 M.
Therefore,
Percent dissociation 
= {[HOCl]dissociated / [HOCl]initial }× 100 
= 1.41 × 10–3 × 102/ 0.08 = 1.76 %.
pH = –log(1.41 × 10–3) = 2.85.
6.11.4	 Ionization of Weak Bases
The ionization of base MOH can be represented 
by equation:
MOH(aq)  
 M+(aq) + OH–(aq)
In a weak base there is partial ionization 
of MOH into M+ and OH–, the case is similar 
to that of acid-dissociation equilibrium. The 
equilibrium constant for base ionization 
is called base ionization constant and is 
represented by Kb. It can be expressed in 
terms of concentration in molarity of various 
species in equilibrium by the following 
equation:
Kb = [M+][OH–] / [MOH]	
	
       (6.33)
Alternatively, if c = initial concentration 
of base and α = degree of ionization of base 
i.e. the extent to which the base ionizes. 
When equilibrium is reached, the equilibrium 
constant can be written as:
Kb = (cα)2 / c (1-α) = cα2 / (1-α)
The values of the ionization constants of 
some selected weak bases, Kb are given in  
Table 6.7.
Many organic compounds like amines 
are weak bases. Amines are derivatives of 
ammonia in which one or more hydrogen 
atoms are replaced by another group. For 
example, methylamine, codeine, quinine and 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 31 :
 198
chemistry
nicotine all behave as very weak bases due to 
their very small Kb. Ammonia produces OH– in 
aqueous solution:
NH3(aq) + H2O(l)  
 NH4
+(aq) + OH–(aq)
The pH scale for the hydrogen ion 
concentration has been extended to get:
pKb = –log (Kb)		
	
	
         (6.34)
Problem 6.21 
The pH of 0.004M hydrazine solution is 9.7. 
Calculate its ionization constant Kb and pKb.
Solution 
NH2NH2  +  H2O  
 NH2NH3
+   +   OH–
From the pH we can calculate the hydrogen 
ion concentration. Knowing hydrogen ion 
concentration and the ionic product of 
water we can calculate the concentration 
of hydroxyl ions. Thus we have:
[H+] = antilog (–pH) 
=  antilog (–9.7) = 1.67 ×10–10
[OH–] = Kw / [H+] = 1 × 10–14 / 1.67 × 10–10 
                  = 5.98 × 10–5
The concentration of the corresponding 
hydrazinium ion is also the same as that 
of hydroxyl ion. The concentration of both 
these ions is very small so the concentration 
of the undissociated base can be taken 
equal to 0.004M.
Thus,
Kb = [NH2NH3
+][OH–] / [NH2NH2] 
= (5.98 × 10–5)2 / 0.004 = 8.96 × 10–7
pKb = –logKb = –log(8.96 × 10–7) = 6.04.
Problem 6.22
Calculate the pH of the solution in which  
0.2M NH4Cl and 0.1M NH3 are present. The 
pKb of ammonia solution is 4.75.
Solution   
NH3   +   H2O   
     NH4
+     +      OH–
The ionization constant of NH3,         
Kb = antilog (–pKb) i.e.
Kb = 10–4.75 = 1.77 × 10–5 M
         NH3   +   H2O  
     NH4
+     +      OH–
Initial concentration (M)
        0.10	
	
      0.20	
        0
Change to reach 
equilibrium (M) 
           –x                          +x                  +x
At equilibrium (M)     
      0.10 – x                 0.20 + x             x
Kb = [NH4
+][OH–] / [NH3]
 = (0.20 + x)(x) / (0.1 – x) = 1.77 × 10–5
As Kb is small, we can neglect x in comparison 
to 0.1M and 0.2M. Thus,
[OH–] = x = 0.88 × 10–5
Therefore, [H+] = 1.12 × 10–9
pH = – log[H+] = 8.95.
6.11.5	 Relation between Ka and Kb
As seen earlier in this chapter, Ka and Kb 
represent the strength of an acid and a base, 
respectively. In case of a conjugate acid-base 
pair, they are related in a simple manner so 
that if one is known, the other can be deduced. 
Considering the example of NH4
+ and NH3 
we see,
NH4
+(aq) + H2O(l)  
 H3O+(aq) + NH3(aq)
 	 Ka = [H3O+][ NH3] / [NH4
+] = 5.6 × 10–10
NH3(aq) + H2O(l)  
  NH4
+(aq) + OH–(aq)     
Kb =[ NH4
+][ OH–] / NH3 = 1.8 × 10–5
Net: 2 H2O(l)  
  H3O+(aq) + OH–(aq)            
Kw = [H3O+][ OH– ] = 1.0 × 10–14 M
Where, Ka represents the strength of NH4
+ 
as an acid and Kb represents the strength of 
NH3 as a base.
It can be seen from the net reaction that 
the equilibrium constant is equal to the 
product of equilibrium constants Ka and Kb 
for the reactions added. Thus,
Ka × Kb = {[H3O+][ NH3] / [NH4
+ ]} × {[NH4
+]
                                         [OH–] / [NH3]}
= [H3O+][OH–] = Kw
= (5.6 ×10–10) × (1.8 × 10–5) = 1.0 × 10–14 M
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 32 :
 199
EQUILIBRIUM
This can be extended to make a 
generalisation. The equilibrium constant 
for a net reaction obtained after adding 
two (or more) reactions equals the product 
of the equilibrium constants for individual 
reactions:
KNET = K1 × K2 × ……                                   (6.35)
Similarly, in case of a conjugate acid-base 
pair,
Ka × Kb = Kw                                                             (6.36)
Knowing one, the other can be obtained. 
It should be noted that a strong acid will have 
a weak conjugate base and vice-versa.
Alternatively, the above expression  
Kw = Ka × Kb, can also be obtained by 
considering the base-dissociation equilibrium 
reaction:
B(aq) + H2O(l)         BH+(aq) + OH–(aq)
Kb = [BH+][OH–] / [B] 
As the concentration of water remains 
constant it has been omitted from the 
denominator and incorporated within the 
dissociation constant. Then multiplying and 
dividing the above expression by [H+], we get:
Kb = [BH+][OH–][H+] / [B][H+]	
     ={[ OH–][H+]}{[BH+] / [B][H+]}
    = Kw / Ka
or  Ka × Kb = Kw
It may be noted that if we take negative 
logarithm of both sides of the equation, then 
pK values of the conjugate acid and base are 
related to each other by the equation:
pKa + pKb = pKw = 14 (at 298K)
Problem 6.23 
Determine the degree of ionization and pH of 
a 0.05M of ammonia solution. The ionization 
constant of ammonia can be taken from 
Table 6.7. Also, calculate the ionization 
constant of the conjugate acid of ammonia.
Solution 
The ionization of NH3 in water is represented 
by equation:
NH3  +  H2O           NH4
+    +    OH–
We use equation (6.33) to calculate 
hydroxyl ion concentration,
[OH–] = c α = 0.05 α 
Kb = 0.05 α2 / (1 – α)
The value of α is small, therefore the 
quadratic equation can be simplified by 
neglecting α in comparison to 1 in the 
denominator on right hand side of the 
equation,
Thus,
Kb = c α2  or   α = √ (1.77 × 10–5 / 0.05)
                 = 0.018.
[OH–] = c α = 0.05 × 0.018 = 9.4 × 10–4M.
[H+] = Kw / [OH–] = 10–14 / (9.4 × 10–4) 
                          = 1.06 × 10–11
pH = –log(1.06 × 10–11) = 10.97.
Now, using the relation for conjugate 
acid-base pair,
Ka × Kb = Kw
using the value of Kb of NH3 from  
Table 6.7.
We can determine the concentration of 
conjugate acid NH4
+
Ka = Kw / Kb = 10–14 / 1.77 × 10–5 
                    = 5.64 × 10–10.
6.11.6	 Di- and Polybasic Acids and Di- 
and Polyacidic Bases
Some of the acids like oxalic acid, sulphuric 
acid and phosphoric acids have more than 
one ionizable proton per molecule of the 
acid. Such acids are known as polybasic or 
polyprotic acids.
The ionization reactions for example for 
a dibasic acid H2X are represented by the 
equations:
H2X(aq) 
 H+(aq) + HX–(aq)
HX–(aq) 
 H+(aq) + X2–(aq)
And the corresponding equilibrium 
constants are given below:
Ka1= {[H+][HX–]} / [H2X] and
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 33 :
 200
chemistry
Ka2 = {[H+][X2-]} / [HX-]
Here, Ka1and Ka2are called the first and second 
ionization constants respectively of the acid H2 
X. Similarly, for tribasic acids like H3PO4 we 
have three ionization constants. The values 
of the ionization constants for some common 
polyprotic acids are given in Table 6.8.
In general, when strength of H-A bond 
decreases, that is, the energy required to break 
the bond decreases, HA becomes a stronger 
acid. Also, when the H-A bond becomes more 
polar i.e., the electronegativity difference 
between the atoms H and A increases and 
there is marked charge separation, cleavage 
of the bond becomes easier thereby increasing 
the acidity.
But it should be noted that while comparing 
elements in the same group of the periodic 
table, H-A bond strength is a more important 
factor in determining acidity than its polar 
nature. As the size of A increases down the 
group, H-A bond strength decreases and so 
the acid strength increases. For example,
Size increases
HF << HCl << HBr << HI
Acid strength increases
Similarly, H2S is stronger acid than H2O.
But, when we discuss elements in the same 
row of the periodic table, H-A bond polarity 
becomes the deciding factor for determining 
the acid strength. As the electronegativity 
of A increases, the strength of the acid also 
increases. For example,
Electronegativity of A increases
CH4 < NH3 < H2O < HF
Acid strength increases
6.11.8	 Common Ion Effect in the 
Ionization of Acids and Bases
Consider an example of acetic acid dissociation 
equilibrium represented as:
CH3COOH(aq) 
  H+(aq) +  CH3COO– (aq) 
or  HAc(aq) 
  H+ (aq) + Ac– (aq)
Ka = [H+][Ac– ] / [HAc]
Addition of acetate ions to an acetic 
acid solution results in decreasing the 
concentration of hydrogen ions, [H+]. Also, 
if H+ ions are added from an external source 
then the equilibrium moves in the direction 
of undissociated acetic acid i.e., in a direction 
of reducing the concentration of hydrogen 
ions, [H+]. This phenomenon is an example 
Table 6.8	
The Ionization Constants of Some 
Common Polyprotic Acids (298K)
It can be seen that higher order ionization 
constants (Ka2, Ka3) are smaller than the 
lower order ionization constant (Ka1) of a 
polyprotic acid. The reason for this is that 
it is more difficult to remove a positively 
charged proton from a negative ion due to 
electrostatic forces. This can be seen in the 
case of removing a proton from the uncharged 
H2CO3 as compared from a negatively charged 
HCO3
–. Similarly, it is more difficult to remove 
a proton from a doubly charged HPO4
2– anion 
as compared to H2PO4
–. 
Polyprotic acid solutions contain a 
mixture of acids like H2A, HA– and A2– in case 
of a diprotic acid. H2A being a strong acid, the 
primary reaction involves the dissociation of 
H2 A, and H3O+ in the solution comes mainly 
from the first dissociation step.
6.11.7	 Factors Affecting Acid Strength
Having discussed quantitatively the strengths 
of acids and bases, we come to a stage where 
we can calculate the pH of a given acid 
solution. But, the curiosity rises about why 
should some acids be stronger than others? 
What factors are responsible for making 
them stronger? The answer lies in its being a 
complex phenomenon. But, broadly speaking 
we can say that the extent of dissociation of 
an acid depends on the strength and polarity 
of the H-A bond.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 34 :
 201
EQUILIBRIUM
of common ion effect. It can be defined as 
a shift in equilibrium on adding a substance 
that provides more of an ionic species already 
present in the dissociation equilibrium. 
Thus, we can say that common ion effect is 
a phenomenon based on the Le Chatelier’s 
principle discussed in section 6.8.
In order to evaluate the pH of the solution 
resulting on addition of 0.05M acetate ion to 
0.05M acetic acid solution, we shall consider 
the acetic acid dissociation equilibrium once 
again,
	
HAc(aq) 
 H+(aq)   +  Ac–(aq)
Initial concentration (M)
    0.05      0         0.05	
Let x be the extent of ionization of acetic 
acid.
Change in concentration (M)	
     –x       +x          +x
Equilibrium concentration (M)
 0.05-x      x      0.05+x
Therefore, 
Ka= [H+][Ac– ]/[H Ac] = {(0.05+x)(x)}/(0.05-x)
As Ka is small for a very weak acid, x<<0.05. 
Hence, (0.05 + x) ≈ (0.05 – x) ≈  0.05
Thus, 
1.8 × 10–5 = (x) (0.05 + x) / (0.05 – x) 
= x(0.05) / (0.05) = x = [H+] = 1.8 × 10–5M
pH = – log(1.8 × 10–5) = 4.74
Problem 6.24 
Calculate the pH of a 0.10M ammonia 
solution. Calculate the pH after 50.0 mL 
of this solution is treated with 25.0 mL of 
0.10M HCl. The dissociation constant of 
ammonia, Kb = 1.77 × 10–5
Solution 
	 NH3     +      H2O      →     NH4
+    +    OH–
	 Kb = [NH4
+][OH–] / [NH3] = 1.77 × 10–5
Before neutralization,
[NH4
+] = [OH–] = x
[NH3] = 0.10 – x   0.10
x2 / 0.10 = 1.77 × 10–5
Thus, x = 1.33 × 10–3 = [OH–]
Therefore, [H+] = Kw / [OH–] = 10–14 / 
             (1.33 × 10–3) = 7.51 × 10–12
pH = –log (7.5 × 10–12) = 11.12
On addition of 25 mL of 0.1M HCl 
solution (i.e., 2.5 mmol of HCl) to 50 
mL of 0.1M ammonia solution (i.e., 5 
mmol of NH3), 2.5 mmol of ammonia 
molecules are neutralized. The resulting 
75 mL solution contains the remaining 
unneutralized 2.5 mmol of NH3 molecules 
and 2.5 mmol of NH4
+.
NH3    +    HCl    →    NH4
+ +  Cl–
2.5           2.5              0          0
At equilibrium 
0              0             2.5         2.5
The resulting 75 mL of solution contains 
2.5 mmol of NH4
+ ions (i.e.,  0.033 M) and 
2.5 mmol (i.e.,  0.033 M ) of uneutralised 
NH3 molecules. This NH3 exists in the 
following equilibrium:
NH4OH  
    NH4
+   +     OH–
0.033M – y               y              y
where, y  =  [OH–]  =  [NH4
+]
The final 75 mL solution after 
neutralisation already contains  
2.5 m mol NH4
+ ions (i.e. 0.033M), thus 
total concentration of NH4
+ ions is given 
as:
[NH4
+] = 0.033 + y
As y is small, [NH4OH]  0.033 M and 
[NH4
+]  0.033M.
We know,
Kb = [NH4
+][OH–] / [NH4OH] 
     = y (0.033)/(0.033) = 1.77 × 10–5 M
Thus, y = 1.77 × 10–5 = [OH–]
[H+] = 10–14 / 1.77 × 10–5 = 0.56 × 10–9
Hence, pH = 9.24
6.11.9	 Hydrolysis of Salts and the pH of 
their Solutions
Salts formed by the reactions between acids 
and bases in definite proportions, undergo 
ionization in water. The cations/anions 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 35 :
 202
chemistry
formed on ionization of salts either exist as 
hydrated ions in aqueous solutions or interact 
with water to reform corresponding acids/
bases depending upon the nature of salts. 
The later process of interaction between 
water and cations/anions or both of salts 
is called hydrolysis. The pH of the solution 
gets affected by this interaction. The cations 
(e.g., Na+, K+, Ca2+, Ba2+, etc.) of strong bases 
and anions (e.g., Cl–, Br–, NO3
–, ClO4
– etc.) of 
strong acids simply get hydrated but do not 
hydrolyse, and therefore the solutions of 
salts formed from strong acids and bases are 
neutral i.e., their pH is 7. However, the other 
category of salts do undergo hydrolysis.
We now consider the hydrolysis of the 
salts of the following types :
(i)	
salts of weak acid and strong base e.g., 
CH3COONa.
(ii)	
salts of strong acid and weak base e.g., 
NH4Cl, and
(iii)	 salts of weak acid and weak base, e.g., 
CH3COONH4.
In the first case, CH3COONa being a salt of 
weak acid, CH3COOH and strong base, NaOH 
gets completely ionised in aqueous solution.
CH3COONa(aq)   →  CH3COO– (aq)+  Na+(aq)
Acetate ion thus formed undergoes 
hydrolysis in water to give acetic acid and 
OH– ions
CH3COO–(aq)+H2O(l)
CH3COOH(aq)+OH–(aq)
Acetic acid being a weak acid  
(Ka = 1.8 × 10–5) remains mainly unionised in 
solution. This results in increase of OH– ion 
concentration in solution making it alkaline. 
The pH of such a solution is more than 7.
Similarly, NH4Cl formed from weak 
base, NH4OH and strong acid, HCl, in water 
dissociates completely.
NH4Cl(aq) → NH
+
4(aq)  +Cl– (aq)
Ammonium ions undergo hydrolysis with 
water to form NH4OH and H+ ions
NH
+
4 (aq) + H2O (1) 
 NH4OH(aq) + H+(aq) 
Ammonium hydroxide is a weak base  
(Kb = 1.77 × 10–5) and therefore remains 
almost unionised in solution. This results in 
increased of H+ ion concentration in solution 
making the solution acidic. Thus, the pH of 
NH4Cl solution in water is less than 7.
Consider the hydrolysis of CH3COONH4 
salt formed from weak acid and weak base. 
The ions formed undergo hydrolysis as follow:
CH3COO– + NH4
+ +  H2O 
  CH3COOH +         	
	
                                                              NH4OH
CH3COOH and NH4OH, also remain into 
partially dissociated form:
CH3COOH    
     CH3COO–  +  H+
NH4OH   
        NH4
+    +   OH–
H2O     
     H+  +  OH–
Without going into detailed calculation, 
it can be said that degree of hydrolysis is 
independent of concentration of solution, and 
pH of such solutions is determined by their 
pK values: 
	
pH = 7 + ½ (pKa – pKb)                             (6.38)
The pH of solution can be greater than 7, 
if the difference is positive and it will be less 
than 7, if the difference is negative.
Problem 6.25
The pKa of acetic acid and pKb of ammonium 
hydroxide are 4.76 and 4.75 respectively. 
Calculate the pH of ammonium acetate 
solution.
Solution
pH = 7 + ½ [pKa – pKb]
       = 7 + ½ [4.76 – 4.75]
       = 7 + ½ [0.01]  = 7 + 0.005  = 7.005
6.12 BUFFER SOLUTIONS
Many body fluids e.g., blood or urine have 
definite pH and any deviation in their pH 
indicates malfunctioning of the body. The 
control of pH is also very important in 
many chemical and biochemical processes. 
Many medical and cosmetic formulations 
require that these be kept and administered 
at a particular pH. The solutions which 
resist change in pH on dilution or with 
the addition of small amounts of acid or 
alkali are called Buffer Solutions. Buffer 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 36 :
 203
EQUILIBRIUM
solutions of known pH can be prepared from 
the knowledge of pKa of the acid or pKb of base 
and by controlling the ratio of the salt and acid 
or salt and base. A mixture of acetic acid and 
sodium acetate acts as buffer solution around 
pH 4.75 and a mixture of ammonium chloride 
and ammonium hydroxide acts as a buffer 
around pH 9.25. You will learn more about 
buffer solutions in higher classes.
6.12.1  Designing Buffer Solution 
Knowledge of pKa, pKb and equilibrium 
constant help us to prepare the buffer solution 
of known pH. Let us see how we can do this.
Preparation of Acidic Buffer 
To prepare a buffer of  acidic pH we use weak 
acid and its salt formed with strong base. 
We develop the equation relating the pH, the 
equilibrium constant, Ka  of weak acid and 
ratio of concentration of weak acid and its 
conjugate base. For the general case where 
the weak acid HA ionises in water, 
HA + H2O  H3O+ + A–
For which we can write the expression
Rearranging the expression we have,
Taking logarithm on both the sides and 
rearranging the terms we get —
	
             Or
                    (6.39)
	
 
(6.40) 
The expression (6.40) is known as 
Henderson–Hasselbalch equation. The 
quantity 
 is the ratio of concentration 
of conjugate base (anion) of the acid and the 
acid present in the mixture. Since acid is a 
weak acid, it ionises to a very little extent and 
concentration of [HA] is negligibly different 
from concentration of acid taken to form 
buffer. Also, most of the conjugate base, [A—], 
comes from the ionisation of salt of the acid. 
Therefore, the concentration of conjugate 
base will be negligibly different from the 
concentration of salt. Thus, equation (6.40) 
takes the form:	
p
pKa
H=
[Salt]
[Acid]
+ log
In the equation (6.39), if the concentration 
of [A—] is equal to the concentration of [HA], 
then pH = pKa because value of log 1 is zero. 
Thus if we take molar concentration of acid 
and salt (conjugate base) same, the pH of the 
buffer solution will be equal to the pKa of the 
acid. So for preparing the buffer solution of 
the required pH we select that acid whose pKa 
is close to the required pH. For acetic acid 
pKa value is 4.76, therefore pH of the buffer 
solution formed by acetic acid and sodium 
acetate taken in equal molar concentration 
will be around 4.76.
A similar analysis of a buffer made with 
a weak base and its conjugate acid leads to 
the result,
      pOH= p
+log [Conjugate acid,BH+]
  [Base,B]
b
K
 	
(6.41) 
pH of the buffer solution can be calculated 
by using the equation pH + pOH =14.
We know that pH + pOH = pKw  and  
pKa + pKb = pKw. On putting these values in 
equation (6.41) it takes the form as follows: 
p
- pH= p
p
[Conjugate acid,BH ]
  [Base,B]
w
w
K
K
Ka



log
                           or      	
pH= p
[Conjugate acid,BH ]
  [Base,B]
Ka +
+
log
    (6.42)
If molar concentration of base and its 
conjugate acid (cation) is same then pH of 
the buffer solution will be same as pKa for the 
base. pKa value for ammonia is s9.25; therefore 
a buffer of pH close to 9.25 can be obtained 
by taking ammonia solution and ammonium 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 37 :
 204
chemistry
chloride solution of same molar concentration. 
For a buffer solution formed by ammonium 
chloride and ammonium hydroxide, equation  
(6.42) becomes:
  
pH=
[Conjugate acid,BH ]
  [Base,B]
9 25
.
log
+
+
                 
pH of the buffer solution is not affected by 
dilution because ratio under the logarithmic 
term remains unchanged. 
6.13	 SOLUBILITY EQUILIBRIA OF 
SPARINGLY SOLUBLE SALTS
We have already known that the solubility of 
ionic solids in water varies a great deal. Some of 
these (like calcium chloride) are so soluble that 
they are hygroscopic in nature and even absorb 
water vapour from atmosphere. Others (such 
as lithium fluoride) have so little solubility 
that they are commonly termed as insoluble. 
The solubility depends on a number of factors 
important amongst which are the lattice 
enthalpy of the salt and the solvation enthalpy 
of the ions in a solution. For a salt to dissolve 
in a solvent the strong forces of attraction 
between its ions (lattice enthalpy) must be 
overcome by the ion-solvent interactions. The 
solvation enthalpy of ions is referred to in 
terms of solvation which is always negative i.e. 
energy is released in the process of solvation. 
The amount of solvation enthalpy depends on 
the nature of the solvent. In case of a non-
polar (covalent) solvent, solvation enthalpy is 
small and hence, not sufficient to overcome 
lattice enthalpy of the salt. Consequently, the 
salt does not dissolve in non-polar solvent. As 
a general rule, for a salt to be able to dissolve 
in a particular solvent its solvation enthalpy 
must be greater than its lattice enthalpy so 
that the latter may be overcome by former. 
Each salt has its characteristic solubility which 
depends on temperature. We classify salts on 
the basis of their solubility in the following 
three categories.
 Category I     Soluble    Solubility > 0.1M
 Category II    Slightly    0.01M<Solubility< 0.1M
                      Soluble 
 Category III   Sparingly  Solubility < 0.01M
                      Soluble
We shall now consider the equilibrium 
between the sparingly soluble ionic salt and 
its saturated aqueous solution.
6.13.1	 Solubility Product Constant
Let us now have a solid like barium sulphate 
in contact with its saturated aqueous solution. 
The equilibrium between the undisolved solid 
and the ions in a saturated solution can be 
represented by the equation:
BaSO4(s) 
  Ba2+(aq) + SO4
2–(aq),
The equilibrium constant is given by the 
equation:
K = {[Ba2+][SO4
2–]} / [BaSO4]
For a pure solid substance the 
concentration remains constant and we can 
write
Ksp = K[BaSO4] = [Ba2+][SO4
2–]           (6.43)
We call Ksp the solubility product constant 
or simply solubility product. The experimental 
value of Ksp in above equation at 298K is  
1.1 × 10–10. This means that for solid barium 
sulphate in equilibrium with its saturated 
solution, the product of the concentrations 
of barium and sulphate ions is equal 
to its solubility product constant. The 
concentrations of the two ions will be equal to 
the molar solubility of the barium sulphate. 
If molar solubility is S, then 
1.1 × 10–10 = (S)(S) = S2 
or                       S = 1.05 × 10–5.
Thus, molar solubility of barium sulphate 
will be equal to 1.05 × 10–5 mol L–1.
A salt may give on dissociation two or 
more than two anions and cations carrying 
different charges. For example, consider a salt 
like zirconium phosphate of molecular formula 
(Zr4+)3(PO4
3–)4. It dissociates into 3 zirconium 
cations of charge +4 and 4 phosphate 
anions of charge –3. If the molar solubility of 
zirconium phosphate is S, then it can be seen 
from the stoichiometry of the compound that
[Zr4+] = 3S and [PO4
3–] = 4S 
and Ksp = (3S)3 (4S)4 = 6912 (S)7
or S = {Ksp / (33 × 44)}1/7 = (Ksp / 6912)1/7
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 38 :
 205
EQUILIBRIUM
A solid salt of the general formula M
X
x
p
y
q


with molar solubility S in equilibrium with 
its saturated solution may be represented by 
the equation:
MxXy(s)     
     xMp+(aq) + yXq– (aq)
(where x × p+ = y × q–)
And its solubility product constant is 
given by:
Ksp   = [Mp+]x[Xq– ]y = (xS)x(yS)y	
     (6.44)	
       = xx . yy . S(x + y)
	
    S(x + y) = Ksp / xx . yy
S = (Ksp / xx . yy)1 / x + y                                             (6.45)
The term Ksp in equation is given by Qsp 
(section 6.6.2) when the concentration of one 
or more species is not the concentration under 
equilibrium. Obviously under equilibrium 
conditions Ksp = Qsp but otherwise it gives the 
direction of the processes of precipitation or 
dissolution. The solubility product constants 
of a number of common salts at 298K are 
given in Table 6.9.
Table 6.9	 The Solubility Product Constants, 
Ksp of Some Common Ionic Salts at 
298K.
Problem 6.26
Calculate the solubility of A2X3 in pure 
water, assuming that neither kind of ion 
reacts with water. The solubility product of 
A2X3, Ksp = 1.1 × 10–23.
Solution
A2X3 → 2A3+ + 3X2–
Ksp = [A3+]2 [X2–]3 = 1.1 × 10–23
If  S = solubility of A2X3, then
[A3+] = 2S;  [X2–] = 3S
therefore, Ksp = (2S)2(3S)3 = 108S5 
                                        = 1.1 × 10–23
thus, S5 = 1 × 10–25
S = 1.0 × 10–5 mol/L.
Problem 6.27
The values of Ksp of two sparingly soluble 
salts Ni(OH)2 and AgCN are 2.0 × 10–15 and 
6 × 0–17 respectively. Which salt is more 
soluble? Explain.
Solution
AgCN  
  Ag+ + CN–
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 39 :
 206
chemistry
Ksp =  [Ag+][CN–] = 6 × 10–17
Ni(OH)2   
   Ni2+ + 2OH–
Ksp = [Ni2+][OH–]2 = 2 × 10–15
Let [Ag+] = S1, then [CN-] = S1
Let [Ni2+] = S2, then [OH–] = 2S2
S1
2 = 6 × 10–17 , S1 = 7.8 × 10–9
(S2)(2S2)2 = 2 × 10–15, S2 = 0.58 × 10–4
Ni(OH)2 is more soluble than AgCN.
6.13.2	 Common Ion Effect on Solubility 
of Ionic Salts
It is expected from Le Chatelier’s principle 
that if we increase the concentration of any 
one of the ions, it should combine with the 
ion of its opposite charge and some of the 
salt will be precipitated till once again Ksp = 
Qsp. Similarly, if the concentration of one of 
the ions is decreased, more salt will dissolve 
to increase the concentration of both the ions 
till once again Ksp = Qsp. This is applicable 
even to soluble salts like sodium chloride 
except that due to higher concentrations 
of the ions, we use their activities instead 
of their molarities in the expression for 
Qsp. Thus if we take a saturated solution of 
sodium chloride and pass HCl gas through it, 
then sodium chloride is precipitated due to 
increased concentration (activity) of chloride 
ion available from the dissociation of HCl. 
Sodium chloride thus obtained is of very 
high purity and we can get rid of impurities 
like sodium and magnesium sulphates. The 
common ion effect is also used for almost 
complete precipitation of a particular ion 
as its sparingly soluble salt, with very low 
value of solubility product for gravimetric 
estimation. Thus we can precipitate silver ion 
as silver chloride, ferric ion as its hydroxide 
(or hydrated ferric oxide) and barium ion as 
its sulphate for quantitative estimations.
Dissolution of S mol/L of Ni(OH)2 provides 
S mol/L of Ni2+ and 2S mol/L of OH–, but 
the total concentration of OH– = (0.10 + 2S) 
mol/L because the solution already contains 
0.10 mol/L of OH– from NaOH.
Ksp = 2.0 × 10–15 = [Ni2+] [OH–]2 
                         = (S) (0.10 + 2S)2
As Ksp is small, 2S << 0.10, 
thus, (0.10 + 2S) ≈ 0.10
Hence,
2.0 × 10–15 = S (0.10)2
S = 2.0 × 10–13 M = [Ni2+]
Problem 6.28
Calculate the molar solubility of Ni(OH)2 in 
0.10 M NaOH. The ionic product of Ni(OH)2 
is 2.0 × 10–15.
Solution
Let the solubility of Ni(OH)2 be equal to S. 
The solubility of salts of weak acids like 
phosphates increases at lower pH. This is 
because at lower pH the concentration of the 
anion decreases due to its protonation. This 
in turn increase the solubility of the salt so 
that Ksp = Qsp. We have to satisfy two equilibria 
simultaneously i.e.,
Ksp = [M+] [X–],
                          
 [X–] / [HX] = Ka/[H+] 
Taking inverse of both side and adding 1 
we get
HX
X
H
HX
H
X
H
a
a
a





















1
1
K
K
K
Now, again taking inverse, we get
[X–] / {[X–] + [HX]} = f = Ka/(Ka + [H+]) and it 
can be seen that ‘f’ decreases as pH decreases. 
If S is the solubility of the salt at a given  
pH then 
Ksp = [S] [f S] = S2 {Ka/(Ka + [H+])} and
S = {Ksp ([H+] + Ka)/Ka}1/2	   
(6.46)
Thus solubility S increases with increase 
in [H+] or decrease in pH. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 40 :
 207
EQUILIBRIUM
SUMMARY
When the number of molecules leaving the liquid to vapour equals the number of molecules 
returning to the liquid from vapour, equilibrium is said to be attained and is dynamic in 
nature. Equilibrium can be established for both physical and chemical processes and at 
this stage rate of forward and reverse reactions are equal. Equilibrium constant, Kc is 
expressed as the concentration of products divided by reactants, each term raised to the 
stoichiometric coefficient.
For reaction, a A + b B        c C +d D
Kc = [C]c[D]d/[A]a[B]b
Equilibrium constant has constant value at a fixed temperature and at this stage all the 
macroscopic properties such as concentration, pressure, etc. become constant. For a gaseous 
reaction equilibrium constant is expressed as Kp and is written by replacing concentration 
terms by partial pressures in Kc expression. The direction of reaction can be predicted by 
reaction quotient Qc which is equal to Kc at equilibrium. Le Chatelier’s principle states that 
the change in any factor such as temperature, pressure, concentration, etc. will cause the 
equilibrium to shift in such a direction so as to reduce or counteract the effect of the change. 
It can be used to study the effect of various factors such as temperature, concentration, 
pressure, catalyst and inert gases on the direction of equilibrium and to control the yield of 
products by controlling these factors. Catalyst does not effect the equilibrium composition 
of a reaction mixture but increases the rate of chemical reaction by making available a new 
lower energy pathway for conversion of reactants to products and vice-versa.
All substances that conduct electricity in aqueous solutions are called electrolytes. Acids, 
bases and salts are electrolytes and the conduction of electricity by their aqueous solutions 
is due to anions and cations produced by the dissociation or ionization of electrolytes 
in aqueous solution. The strong electrolytes are completely dissociated. In weak electrolytes 
there is equilibrium between the ions and the unionized electrolyte molecules. According to 
Arrhenius, acids give hydrogen ions while bases produce hydroxyl ions in their aqueous 
solutions. Brönsted-Lowry on the other hand, defined an acid as a proton donor and a base as 
a proton acceptor. When a Brönsted-Lowry acid reacts with a base, it produces its conjugate 
base and a conjugate acid corresponding to the base with which it reacts. Thus a conjugate 
pair of acid-base differs only by one proton. Lewis further generalised the definition of an 
acid as an electron pair acceptor and a base as an electron pair donor. The expressions 
for ionization (equilibrium) constants of weak acids (Ka) and weak bases (Kb) are developed 
using Arrhenius definition. The degree of ionization and its dependence on concentration and 
common ion are discussed. The pH scale (pH = –log[H+]) for the hydrogen ion concentration 
(activity) has been introduced and extended to other quantities (pOH = – log[OH–]); pKa = –log[Ka];  
pKb = –log[Kb]; and pKw = –log[Kw] etc.). The ionization of water has been considered and we 
note that the equation: pH + pOH = pKw is always satisfied. The salts of strong acid and 
weak base, weak acid and strong base, and weak acid and weak base undergo hydrolysis in 
aqueous solution. The definition of buffer solutions,  and their importance are discussed 
briefly. The solubility equilibrium of sparingly soluble salts is discussed and the equilibrium 
constant is introduced as solubility product constant (Ksp). Its relationship with solubility 
of the salt is established. The conditions of precipitation of the salt from their solutions 
or their dissolution in water are worked out. The role of common ion and the solubility of 
sparingly soluble salts is also discussed.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 41 :
 208
chemistry
SUGGESTED ACTIVITIES FOR STUDENTS REGARDING THIS UNIT
(a)	 The student may use pH paper in determining the pH of fresh juices of various vegetables 
and fruits, soft drinks, body fluids and also that of water samples available.
(b)	 The pH paper may also be used to determine the pH of different salt solutions and from 
that he/she may determine if these are formed from strong/weak acids and bases.
(c)	 They may prepare some buffer solutions by mixing the solutions of sodium acetate and 
acetic acid and determine their pH using pH paper.
(d)	 They may be provided with different indicators to observe their colours in solutions of 
varying pH.
(e)	 They may perform some acid-base titrations using indicators.
(f)	 They may observe common ion effect on the solubility of sparingly soluble salts.    
(g)	 If pH meter is available in their school, they may measure the pH with it and compare 
the results obtained with that of the pH paper.
EXERCISES
6.1	
A liquid is in equilibrium with its vapour in a sealed container at a fixed temperature.
The volume of the container is suddenly increased.
a)	
What is the initial effect of the change on vapour pressure?
b)	
How do rates of evaporation and condensation change initially?
c)	
What happens when equilibrium is restored finally and what will be the final vapour 
pressure? 
6.2	
What is Kc for the following equilibrium when the equilibrium concentration of each 
substance is: [SO2]= 0.60M, [O2] = 0.82M and [SO3] = 1.90M ?
2SO2(g) + O2(g)  
  2SO3(g)
6.3	
At a certain temperature and total pressure of 105Pa, iodine vapour contains 40% by 
volume of I atoms
I2 (g)  
  2I (g)
	
Calculate Kp for the equilibrium.
6.4	
Write the expression for the equilibrium constant, Kc for each of the following reactions:
	
(i)	
2NOCl (g)  
  2NO (g) + Cl2 (g)
	
(ii)	 2Cu(NO3)2 (s)  
  2CuO (s) + 4NO2 (g) + O2 (g)
	
(iii)	 CH3COOC2H5(aq) + H2O(l)  
  CH3COOH (aq) + C2H5OH (aq)
	
(iv)	 Fe3+ (aq) + 3OH– (aq)  
  Fe(OH)3 (s)
	
(v)	 I2 (s) + 5F2  
  2IF5
6.5	
Find out the value of Kc for each of the following equilibria from the value of Kp:
	
(i) 	 2NOCl (g)  
  2NO (g) + Cl2 (g);  Kp= 1.8 × 10–2 at 500 K
	
(ii)	 CaCO3 (s)  
  CaO(s) + CO2(g);  Kp= 167 at 1073 K
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 42 :
 209
EQUILIBRIUM
6.6	
For the following equilibrium, Kc= 6.3 × 1014 at 1000 K 
	
NO (g) + O3 (g)   
  NO2 (g) + O2 (g)
 	 Both the forward and reverse reactions in the equilibrium are elementary bimolecular  
	
reactions. What is Kc, for the reverse reaction?
6.7	
Explain why pure liquids and solids can be ignored while writing the equilibrium 
constant expression?
6.8	
Reaction between N2 and O2– takes place as follows:
2N2 (g) + O2 (g)  
  2N2O (g)
	
If a mixture of 0.482 mol N2 and 0.933 mol of O2 is placed in a 10 L reaction vessel 
and allowed to form N2O at a temperature for which Kc= 2.0 × 10–37, determine the 
composition of equilibrium mixture.
6.9	
Nitric oxide reacts with Br2 and gives nitrosyl bromide as per reaction given below:
2NO (g) + Br2 (g)  
  2NOBr (g)
	
When 0.087 mol of NO and 0.0437 mol of Br2 are mixed in a closed container at 
constant temperature, 0.0518 mol of NOBr is obtained at equilibrium. Calculate 
equilibrium amount of NO and Br2 .
6.10	 At 450K, Kp= 2.0 × 1010/bar for the given reaction at equilibrium.
2SO2(g) + O2(g)  
 2SO3 (g)
	
 What is Kc at this temperature ?
6.11	 A sample of HI(g) is placed in flask at a pressure of 0.2 atm. At equilibrium the partial 
pressure of HI(g) is 0.04 atm. What is Kp for the given equilibrium ?
2HI (g)  
 H2 (g) + I2 (g)
6.12	 A mixture of 1.57 mol of N2, 1.92 mol of H2 and 8.13 mol of NH3 is introduced into 
a 20 L reaction vessel at 500 K. At this temperature, the equilibrium constant, Kc 
for the reaction N2 (g) + 3H2 (g) 
 2NH3 (g) is 1.7 × 102. Is the reaction mixture at 
equilibrium? If not, what is the direction of the net reaction?
6.13	 The equilibrium constant expression for a gas reaction is,
Kc 





NH
O
NO
H O
3
4
2
5
4
2
6
	
Write the balanced chemical equation corresponding to this expression.
6.14	 One mole of H2O and one mole of CO are taken in 10 L vessel and heated to  
725 K. At equilibrium 40% of water (by mass) reacts with CO according to the equation,
H2O (g) + CO (g) 
 H2 (g) + CO2 (g)
	
Calculate the equilibrium constant for the reaction.
6.15	 At 700 K, equilibrium constant for the reaction:
H2 (g) + I2 (g) 
 2HI (g)
	
is 54.8. If 0.5 mol L–1 of HI(g) is present at equilibrium at 700 K, what are the 
concentration of H2(g) and I2(g) assuming that we initially started with HI(g) and 
allowed it to reach equilibrium at 700K?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 43 :
 210
chemistry
6.16	 What is the equilibrium concentration of each of the substances in the equilibrium 
when the initial concentration of ICl was 0.78 M ?
	
2ICl (g) 
 I2 (g) + Cl2 (g);   Kc = 0.14 
6.17	 Kp = 0.04 atm at 899 K for the equilibrium shown below. What is the equilibrium 
concentration of C2H6 when it is placed in a flask at 4.0 atm pressure and allowed  
to come to equilibrium?
	
	
	
          C2H6 (g) 
 C2H4 (g) + H2 (g)
6.18	 Ethyl acetate is formed by the reaction between ethanol and acetic acid and the 
equilibrium is represented as:
CH3COOH (l) + C2H5OH (l) 
 CH3COOC2H5 (l) + H2O (l)
	
(i)	
Write the concentration ratio (reaction quotient), Qc,  for this reaction (note: water  
	
	
is not in excess and is not a solvent in this reaction)
	
(ii)	 At 293 K, if one starts with 1.00 mol of acetic acid and 0.18 mol of ethanol, there  
	
	
is 0.171 mol of ethyl acetate in the final equilibrium mixture. Calculate the  
	
	
equilibrium constant.
	
(iii)	 Starting with 0.5 mol of ethanol and 1.0 mol of acetic acid and maintaining it at  
	
	
293 K, 0.214 mol of ethyl acetate is found after sometime. Has equilibrium been  
	
	
reached?
6.19	 A sample of pure PCl5 was introduced into an evacuated vessel at 473 
K. After equilibrium was attained, concentration of PCl5 was found to be  
0.5 × 10–1 mol L–1. If value of Kc is 8.3 × 10–3, what are the concentrations of PCl3 and 
Cl2 at equilibrium?
PCl5 (g) 
 PCl3 (g)  +   Cl2(g)  
6.20	 One of the reaction that takes place in producing steel from iron ore is the reduction 
of iron(II) oxide by carbon monoxide to give iron metal and CO2.  
	
FeO (s) + CO (g) 
 Fe (s) + CO2 (g); Kp = 0.265 atm at 1050K
	
What are the equilibrium partial pressures of CO and CO2 at 1050 K if the initial 
partial pressures are:  pCO= 1.4 atm and 
 = 0.80 atm?
6.21	 Equilibrium constant, Kc for the reaction 
N2 (g) + 3H2 (g) 
 2NH3 (g) at 500 K is 0.061
	
At a particular time, the analysis shows that composition of the reaction mixture is 
3.0 mol L–1 N2, 2.0 mol L–1 H2 and 0.5 mol L–1 NH3. Is the reaction at equilibrium? If 
not in which direction does the reaction tend to proceed to reach equilibrium?
6.22	 Bromine monochloride, BrCl decomposes into bromine and chlorine and reaches the 
equilibrium:
2BrCl (g) 
 Br2 (g) + Cl2 (g)
	
for which Kc= 32 at 500 K. If initially pure BrCl is present at a concentration of  
3.3 × 10–3 mol L–1, what is its molar concentration in the mixture at equilibrium?
6.23	 At 1127 K and 1 atm pressure, a gaseous mixture of CO and CO2 in equilibrium with 
soild carbon has 90.55% CO by mass
C (s) + CO2 (g) 
 2CO (g)
	
Calculate Kc for this reaction at the above temperature.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 44 :
 211
EQUILIBRIUM
6.24 	
Calculate a) ∆G and b) the equilibrium constant for the formation of NO2 from NO 
and O2 at 298K
NO (g) + ½ O2 (g) 
 NO2 (g)
	
where 
	
∆fG (NO2) = 52.0 kJ/mol
	
∆fG (NO) = 87.0 kJ/mol
	
∆fG (O2) = 0 kJ/mol
6.25	
Does the number of moles of reaction products increase, decrease or remain same 
when each of the following equilibria is subjected to a decrease in pressure by 
increasing the volume?
	
(a)	 PCl5 (g)   
   PCl3 (g) + Cl2 (g)
	
(b)	 CaO (s) + CO2 (g)   
   CaCO3 (s)
	
(c)	 3Fe (s) + 4H2O (g)   
   Fe3O4 (s) + 4H2 (g)
6.26	
Which of the following reactions will get affected by increasing the pressure?  
Also, mention whether change will cause the reaction to go into forward or  
backward direction.
	
(i)	 COCl2 (g)   
   CO (g) + Cl2 (g)
	
(ii)	 CH4 (g) + 2S2 (g)   
   CS2 (g) + 2H2S (g)
	
(iii)	 CO2 (g) + C (s)   
   2CO (g)
	
(iv)	 2H2 (g) + CO (g)   
   CH3OH (g)
	
(v)	 CaCO3 (s)   
   CaO (s) + CO2 (g)
	
(vi)	 4 NH3 (g) + 5O2 (g)   
   4NO (g)  +  6H2O(g)
6.27	
The equilibrium constant for the following reaction is 1.6 ×105 at 1024K
	
H2(g) + Br2(g)   
   2HBr(g)
	
Find the equilibrium pressure of all gases if 10.0 bar of HBr is introduced into a 
sealed container at 1024K.
6.28 	
Dihydrogen gas is obtained from natural gas by partial oxidation with steam as per 
following endothermic reaction:
	
CH4 (g) + H2O (g)   
   CO (g) + 3H2 (g)
	
(a)	 Write as expression for Kp for the above reaction.
	
(b)	 How will the values of Kp and composition of equilibrium mixture be  
affected by
	
	
(i)	
increasing the pressure
	
	
(ii)	 increasing the temperature
	
	
(iii)	 using a catalyst?
6.29	
Describe the effect of:
	
a) 	 addition of H2
	
b) 	 addition of CH3OH
	
c) 	 removal of CO
	
d) 	 removal of CH3OH
	
on the equilibrium of the reaction:
	
	
2H2(g) + CO (g)     
     CH3OH (g)
6.30 	
At 473 K, equilibrium constant Kc for decomposition of phosphorus pentachloride, 
PCl5 is 8.3 ×10-3. If decomposition is depicted as,
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 45 :
 212
chemistry
	
PCl5 (g)     
     PCl3 (g) + Cl2 (g)	
∆rH = 124.0 kJ mol–1
	
a) 	 write an expression for Kc for the reaction.
	
b) 	 what is the value of Kc for the reverse reaction at the same temperature?
	
c) 	 what would be the effect on Kc if (i) more PCl5 is added (ii) pressure is increased  
       (iii) the temperature is increased ?
6.31 	
Dihydrogen gas used in Haber’s process is produced by reacting methane from 
natural gas with high temperature steam. The first stage of two stage reaction 
involves the formation of CO and H2. In second stage, CO formed in first stage is 
reacted with more steam in water gas shift reaction,
	
CO (g) + H2O (g) 
 CO2 (g) + H2 (g)
	
If a reaction vessel at 400°C is charged with an equimolar mixture of CO and steam 
such that pco = pH2O = 4.0 bar, what will be the partial pressure of H2 at equilibrium? 
Kp= 10.1 at 400°C
6.32	
Predict which of the following reaction will have appreciable concentration of reactants 
and products:
	
a)	
Cl2 (g)  
  2Cl (g) Kc = 5 ×10–39
	
b)	 Cl2 (g) + 2NO (g)  
  2NOCl (g) 	 Kc = 3.7 × 108
	
c)	
Cl2 (g) + 2NO2 (g)  
  2NO2Cl (g) 	Kc = 1.8
6.33	
The value of Kc for the reaction 3O2 (g)  
  2O3 (g) is 2.0 ×10–50 at 25°C. If the 
equilibrium concentration of O2 in air at 25°C is 1.6 ×10–2, what is the concentration 
of O3?
6.34 	
The reaction, CO(g) + 3H2(g)  
  CH4(g) + H2O(g)
	
is at equilibrium at 1300 K in a 1L flask. It also contain 0.30 mol of CO, 0.10 mol of 
H2 and 0.02 mol of H2O and an unknown amount of CH4 in the flask. Determine the 
concentration of CH4 in the mixture. The equilibrium constant, Kc for the reaction 
at the given temperature is 3.90.
6.35	
What is meant by the conjugate acid-base pair? Find the conjugate acid/base for 
the following species:
	
HNO2, CN–, HClO4, F –, OH–, CO  , and S2–
6.36	
Which of the followings are Lewis acids? H2O, BF3, H+, and NH4
+
6.37	
What will be the conjugate bases for the Brönsted acids: HF, H2SO4 and HCO–
3?
6.38	
Write the conjugate acids for the following Brönsted bases: NH2
–, NH3 and HCOO–.
6.39	
The species: H2O, HCO3
–, HSO4
– and NH3 can act both as Brönsted acids and bases. 
For each case give the corresponding conjugate acid and base.
6.40	
Classify the following species into Lewis acids and Lewis bases and show how these 
act as Lewis acid/base: (a) OH– (b) F– (c) H+ (d) BCl3 .
6.41	
The concentration of hydrogen ion in a sample of soft drink is 3.8 × 10–3 M. What is 
its pH?
6.42	
The pH of a sample of vinegar is 3.76. Calculate the concentration of hydrogen ion 
in it.
6.43	
The ionization constant of HF, HCOOH and HCN at 298K are 6.8 × 10–4, 
1.8 × 10–4 and 4.8 × 10–9 respectively. Calculate the ionization constants of the 
corresponding conjugate base.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 46 :
 213
EQUILIBRIUM
6.44	
The ionization constant of phenol is 1.0 × 10–10. What is the concentration of phenolate 
ion in 0.05 M solution of phenol? What will be its degree of ionization if the solution 
is also 0.01M in sodium phenolate?
6.45	
The first ionization constant of H2S is 9.1 × 10–8. Calculate the concentration 
of HS– ion in its 0.1M solution. How will this concentration be affected if the 
solution is 0.1M in HCl also? If the second dissociation constant of H2S is  
1.2 × 10–13, calculate the concentration of S2– under both conditions.
6.46	
The ionization constant of acetic acid is 1.74 × 10–5. Calculate the degree of 
dissociation of acetic acid in its 0.05 M solution. Calculate the concentration of 
acetate ion in the solution and its pH.
6.47	
It has been found that the pH of a 0.01M solution of an organic acid is 4.15. Calculate 
the concentration of the anion, the ionization constant of the acid and its pKa.
6.48	
Assuming complete dissociation, calculate the pH of the following solutions:
	
(a) 0.003 M HCl (b) 0.005 M NaOH (c) 0.002 M HBr (d) 0.002 M KOH
6.49	
Calculate the pH of the following solutions:
	
a)	
2 g of TlOH dissolved in water to give 2 litre of solution.
	
b)	 0.3 g of Ca(OH)2 dissolved in water to give 500 mL of solution.
	
c)	
0.3 g of NaOH dissolved in water to give 200 mL of solution.
	
d)	 1mL of 13.6 M HCl is diluted with water to give 1 litre of solution.
6.50	
The degree of ionization of a 0.1M bromoacetic acid solution is 0.132. Calculate the 
pH of the solution and the pKa of bromoacetic acid.
6.51	
The pH of 0.005M codeine (C18H21NO3) solution is 9.95. Calculate its ionization 
constant and pKb.
6.52	
What is the pH of 0.001M aniline solution? The ionization constant of aniline 
can be taken from Table 6.7. Calculate the degree of ionization of aniline in the 
solution. Also calculate the ionization constant of the conjugate acid of aniline.
6.53	
Calculate the degree of ionization of 0.05M acetic acid if its pKa value is 4.74. 
How is the degree of dissociation affected when its solution also contains  
(a) 0.01M (b) 0.1M in HCl ?
6.54	
The ionization constant of dimethylamine is 5.4 × 10–4. Calculate its degree of 
ionization in its 0.02M solution. What percentage of dimethylamine is ionized if the 
solution is also 0.1M in NaOH?
6.55	
Calculate the hydrogen ion concentration in the following biological fluids whose 
pH are given below:
	
(a)	 Human muscle-fluid, 6.83 	
(b) 	 Human stomach fluid, 1.2 
	
(c)	 Human blood, 7.38 	
(d) 	 Human saliva, 6.4.
6.56	
The pH of milk, black coffee, tomato juice, lemon juice and egg white are 6.8, 5.0, 
4.2, 2.2 and 7.8 respectively. Calculate corresponding hydrogen ion concentration 
in each.
6.57	
If 0.561 g of KOH is dissolved in water to give 200 mL of solution at 298 K. Calculate 
the concentrations of potassium, hydrogen and hydroxyl ions. What is its pH?
6.58	
The solubility of Sr(OH)2 at 298 K is 19.23 g/L of solution. Calculate the concentrations 
of strontium and hydroxyl ions and the pH of the solution.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 47 :
 214
chemistry
6.59	
The ionization constant of propanoic acid is 1.32 × 10–5. Calculate the degree of 
ionization of the acid in its 0.05M solution and also its pH. What will be its degree 
of ionization if the solution is 0.01M in HCl also?
6.60	
The pH of 0.1M solution of cyanic acid (HCNO) is 2.34. Calculate the ionization 
constant of the acid and its degree of ionization in the solution.
6.61	
The ionization constant of nitrous acid is 4.5 × 10–4. Calculate the pH of 0.04 M 
sodium nitrite solution and also its degree of hydrolysis.
6.62	
A 0.02M solution of pyridinium hydrochloride has pH = 3.44. Calculate the ionization 
constant of pyridine.
6.63	
Predict if the solutions of the following salts are neutral, acidic or basic:
	
NaCl, KBr, NaCN, NH4NO3, NaNO2 and KF
6.64	
The ionization constant of chloroacetic acid is 1.35 × 10–3. What will be the pH of 
0.1M acid and its 0.1M sodium salt solution?
6.65	
Ionic product of water at 310 K is 2.7 × 10–14. What is the pH of neutral water at 
this temperature?
6.66	
Calculate the pH of the resultant mixtures:
	
a)   10 mL of 0.2M Ca(OH)2 + 25 mL of 0.1M HCl
	
b)   10 mL of 0.01M H2SO4 + 10 mL of 0.01M Ca(OH)2
	
c)   10 mL of 0.1M H2SO4 + 10 mL of 0.1M KOH
6.67	
Determine the solubilities of silver chromate, barium chromate, ferric hydroxide, 
lead chloride and mercurous iodide at 298K from their solubility product constants 
given in Table 6.9. Determine also the molarities of individual ions.
6.68	
The solubility product constant of Ag2CrO4 and AgBr are 1.1 × 10–12 and  
5.0 × 10–13 respectively. Calculate the ratio of the molarities of their saturated 
solutions.
6.69	
Equal volumes of 0.002 M solutions of sodium iodate and cupric chlorate are 
mixed together. Will it lead to precipitation of copper iodate? (For cupric iodate  
Ksp = 7.4 × 10–8 ).
6.70	
The ionization constant of benzoic acid is 6.46 × 10–5 and Ksp for silver benzoate is 
2.5 × 10–13. How many times is silver benzoate more soluble in a buffer of pH 3.19 
compared to its solubility in pure water?
6.71	
What is the maximum concentration of equimolar solutions of ferrous sulphate and 
sodium sulphide so that when mixed in equal volumes, there is no precipitation of 
iron sulphide? (For iron sulphide, Ksp = 6.3 × 10–18).
6.72	
What is the minimum volume of water required to dissolve 1g of calcium sulphate 
at 298 K? (For calcium sulphate, Ksp is 9.1 × 10–6).
6.73	
The concentration of sulphide ion in 0.1M HCl solution saturated with hydrogen 
sulphide is 1.0 × 10–19 M. If 10 mL of this is added to 5 mL of 0.04 M solution of the 
following: FeSO4, MnCl2, ZnCl2 and CdCl2. in which of these solutions precipitation 
will take place?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 1 :
 Unit 7
7.25	
15 g
Unit 8
8.32	
Mass of carbon dioxide formed = 0.505 g
	
Mass of water formed = 0.0864 g
8.33	
% fo nitrogen = 56
8.34	
% of chlorine = 37.57
8.35	
% of sulphur = 19.66
	
Unit 9
9.1	
Due to the side reaction in termination step by the combination of two C.
   H3 free 
radicals.
9.2	
(a)	 2-Methyl-but-2-ene	
(b)	 Pent-1-ene-3-yne
	
(c)	 Buta-1, 3-diene	
(d)	 4-Phenylbut-1-ene
	
(e)	 2-Methylphenol	
(f)	
5-(2-Methylpropyl)-decane
 
(g) 4-Ethyldeca –1,5,8- triene
9.3	
(a)	 (i)	
CH2 = CH – CH2 – CH3	
But-1-ene
	
	
(ii)	 CH3 – CH2 = CH – CH3	
But-2-ene
	
	
(iii)	 CH2 = C – CH3	
2-Methylpropene
	
	
	
          |
	
	
	
          CH3
	
(b)	 (i)	
HC ≡ C – CH2 – CH2 – CH3	
Pent-1-yne
	
	
(ii)	 CH3 – C ≡ C – CH2 – CH3	
Pent-2-yne
	
	
(iii)	 CH3 – CH – C ≡ CH	
3-Methylbut-1-yne
	
                                |
	
                                CH3
9.4	
(i)	
Ethanal and propanal	
(ii)	 Butan-2-one and pentan-2-one
	
(iii)	 Methanal and pentan-3-one	
(iv)	 Propanal and benzaldehyde
9.5	
3-Ethylpent-2-ene
9.6	
But-2-ene
9.7	
4-Ethylhex-3-ene   
	
CH3 – CH2– C = CH – CH2–CH3	
	
	
	
	
                                 |
	
                  CH2–CH3
Answer to Some Selected Problems
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 2 :
 329
answers
9.8	
(a)	 C4H10(g)+13/202(g)  
∆
  4CO2(g) + 5H2O(g)
	
(b)	 C5H10(g)+15/202(g)  
∆
  5CO2(g) + 5H2O(g)
	
(c)	 C5H10(g) + 17/2 O2(g)  
∆
  6CO2(g) + 5H2O(g)
	
(d)	 C7H8(g) + 902(g)  
∆
  7CO2(g) + 4H2O(g)
	
cis-Hex-2-ene	
	
	
trans-Hex-2-ene
	
The cis form will have higher boiling point due to more polar nature leading 
to stronger intermolecular dipole–dipole interaction, thus requiring more 
heat energy to separate them.
9.10	
Due to resonance
9.11 
Planar, conjugated ring system with delocalisation of (4n+2) π electrons, 
where, n is an integer
9.12	
Lack of delocalisation of  (4n +2) π electrons in the cyclic system.
9.13	
(i)
	
	
	
(ii)	
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 3 :
 330
chemistry
	
(iii)
	
	
	
(iv)     
9.14	
	
	
15 H attached to 1° carbons
 
  4 H attached to 2° carbons
 
  1 H attached to 3° carbons
9.15	
More the branching in alkane, lower will be the boiling point.
9.16	
Refer to addition reaction of HBr to unsymmetrical alkenes in the text.
	
All the three products cannot be obtained by any one of the Kekulé’s 
structures. This shows that benzene is a resonance hybrid of the two 
resonating structures.
9.18 
H – C ≡ C – H > C6H6 > C6H14. Due to maximum s orbital character 
in enthyne (50 per cent) as compared to 33 per cent in benzene and  
25 per cent in n-hexane.
9.19	
Due to the presence of 6 π electrons, benzene behaves as a rich source of 
electrons thus being easily attacked by reagents deficient in electrons.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 4 :
 331
answers
9.20 	 (i)	
	
(ii)	C2H4 
Br2
 CH2–CH2 alc, KOH  CH2=CHNr 
NaNH2
	
	
	
Br	
BR
	
	
	
	
	
	
 
K
	
(iii)  
	
	
    CH3
	
	
|
9.21	
CH2 = C – CH2 – CH3 	
	
  2-Methylbut-1-ene
	
	
  CH3
	
         |
	
CH3 – C = CH – CH3 	
	
	
2-Methylbut-2-ene
	
	
  CH3
	
         |
	
CH3 – CH –CH = CH2 	
	
  3-Methylbut-1-ene
9.22	
(a)	 Chlorobenzene>p-nitrochlorobenzene> 2,4 – dinitrochlorobenzene
	
(b)	 Toluene > p-CH3-C6H4-NO2 > p-O2N–C6H4–NO2
9.23	
Toleune undergoes nitration most easily due to electron releasing 
nature of the methyl group.
9.24	
FeCl3
9.25	
Due to the formation of side products. For example, by starting with  
1-bromopropane and 1-bromobutane, hexane and octane are the side 
products besides heptane.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 5 :
 Notes
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 1 :
 1
answerS
Chemistry
Part II
Textbook for Class XI
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 2 :
 2
chemistry
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
	 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or 
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, 
recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the publisher.
	 This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be 
lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, 
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.
	 The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised 
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect 
and should be unacceptable.
Publication Team
Head, Publication	
:	 Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Editor	
:	 Shveta Uppal
Chief Production	
:	 Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business	
:	 Amitabh Kumar
Manager (In charge)
Editor	
:	 Binoy Banerjee
Assistant Production 	
:	 Om Prakash  
Officer
Cover
Shweta Rao
Illustrations
Nidhi Wadhwa
Anil Nayal
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION  
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016	
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road 
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan 
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114	
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon  
Guwahati 781 021	
	
 Phone :  0361-2674869 
First Edition	
	
March 2006	
Phalguna 1927
Reprinted
October 2006, November 2007,	
 
January 2009, December 2009,	
November 2010, January 2012,	
November 2012, November 2013,	
December 2014, December 2015,	
February 2017, February 2018,	
December 2018, September 2019,	
August 2021 and November 2021
Revised Edition
October 2022  Kartika 1944
Reprinted 
March 2024  Chaitra 1946
	
PD 360T SU
© National Council of Educational 
Research and Training, 2006, 2022
` 120.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT 
watermark
Published at the Publication Division 
by the Secretary, National Council of  
Educational Research and Training, 
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016  
and printed at Hi-Tech Graphics D-4/3, 
Basement, Okhla Industrial Area, Phase-II, 
New Delhi -110 020
11083 – Chemistry Part II
Textbook for Class XI
ISBN  81-7450-494-X (Part I)
ISBN  81-7450-535-0 (Part II)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 3 :
 3
answerS
Foreword
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005 recommends that children’s life at 
school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure 
from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our system and causes 
a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi and textbooks developed 
on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this basic idea. They also attempt 
to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp boundaries between different 
subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly further in the direction 
of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on Education 
(1986). 
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and 
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to 
pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space, 
time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information 
passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of 
examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning 
are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat 
children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning. 
Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the 
annual calender so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted 
to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how 
effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, 
rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address 
the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at 
different stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available 
for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher 
priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion 
in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates 
the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this 
book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in science and 
mathematics, Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book, Professor B. 
L. Khandelwal for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers contributed 
to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for making 
this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have 
generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel. 
We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring Committee, 
appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, Ministry of 
Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor Mrinal 
Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As 
an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the 
quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will 
enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
	
Director
New Delhi	
National Council of Educational 
20 December 2005	
Research and Training
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 4 :
 4
chemistry
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 5 :
 5
answerS
Rationalisation of Content in the Textbook
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce 
content load on students. The National Education Policy 2020, 
also emphasises reducing the content load and providing 
opportunities for experiential learning with creative mindset. 
In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to 
rationalise the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes 
already developed by the NCERT across classes have been taken 
into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of 
the following:
• Overlapping with similar content included in other subject 
areas in the same class
• Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the 
same subject
• Difficulty level
• Content, which is easily accessible to students without much 
interventions from teachers and can be learned by children 
through self-learning or peer-learning
• Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out 
the changes given above.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 6 :
 6
chemistry
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 7 :
 7
answerS
Textbook Development Committee
Chairperson, Advisory Group for Textbooks in Science and Mathematics
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Chairman,  Advisory Committee, Inter 
University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCCA), Ganeshbhind,  
Pune University, Pune
Chief Advisor
B.L. Khandelwal, Professor (Retd.), Emeritus Scientist, CSIR; Emeritus Fellow, AICTE 
and formerly Chairman, Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology,  
New Delhi
Members
A. S. Brar, Professor, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
Anjni Koul, Lecturer, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
H.O. Gupta, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
I.P. Aggarwal, Professor, Regional Institute of Education, NCERT, Bhopal
Jaishree Sharma, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
M. Chandra, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Poonam Sawhney, PGT (Chemistry), Kendriya Vidyalaya, Vikas Puri, New Delhi
R.K. Parashar, Lecturer, DESM NCERT, New Delhi
S.K. Dogra, Professor, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Centre for Biomedical Research Delhi 
University, Delhi
S.K. Gupta, Reader, School of Studies in Chemistry, Jiwaji University, Gwalior
Sadhna Bhargava, PGT (Chemistry), Sardar Patel Vidyalaya, Lodhi Estate, New Delhi
Shubha Keshwan, Headmistress, Demonstration School, Regional Institute of 
Education, NCERT, Mysore
Sukhvir Singh, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Sunita Malhotra, Professor, School of Sciences, IGNOU, Maidan Garhi, New Delhi
V.K. Verma, Professor (Retd.) Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi
V.P. Gupta, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, NCERT, Bhopal
Member-Coordinator
Alka Mehrotra, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 8 :
 8
chemistry
Acknowledgements
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges the valuable 
contributions of the individuals and organisations involved in the development of 
Chemistry textbook for Class XI. It also acknowledges that some useful material 
from the reprint editions (2005) of Chemistry textbooks has been utilised in the 
development of the present textbook.  The following academics contributed effectively 
for editing, reviewing, refining and finalisation of the manuscript of this book: G.T. 
Bhandage, Professor,  RIE, Mysuru; N. Ram, Professor, IIT, New Delhi; R. Sindhu, 
Reader, RIE (NCERT), Bhopal; Sanjeev Kumar, Reader, Desh Bandhu College, Kalkaji, 
New Delhi; Shampa Bhattacharya, Reader, Hans Raj College, Delhi; Vijay Sarda, 
Reader, Zakir Husain College, New Delhi. K.K. Arora, Reader, Zakir Husain College, 
New Delhi; Shashi Saxena, Reader, Hans Raj College, Delhi; Anuradha Sen, Apeejay 
School, Sheikh Sarai, New Delhi; C. Shrinivas, PGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Pushp Vihar,  
New Delhi; D.L. Bharti, PGT, Ramjas School, Sector IV, R.K. Puram, New Delhi;  
Ila Sharma, PGT, Delhi Public School, Dwarka, Sector-B, New Delhi; Raj Lakshmi 
Karthikeyan, Head (Science), Mother’s International School, Sri Aurobindo Marg, 
New Delhi; Sushma Kiran Setia, Principal, Sarvodaya Kanya Vidyalaya, Hari Nagar 
(CT), New Delhi; Nidhi Chaudray, PGT, CRPF Public School, Rohini, Delhi; and 
Veena Suri, PGT, Bluebells School, Kailash, New Delhi. We are thankful to them.
We express gratitude to R.S. Sindhu, Professor (Retd.), DESM, NCERT, New 
Delhi, for editing, reviewing and refining the textbook right from the initial stage.
We are also grateful to Ruchi Verma, Associate Professor, DESM, NCERT, New 
Delhi; Pramila Tanwar, Associate Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi; R.B. Pareek, 
Associate Professor, RIE, Ajmer and A.K. Arya, Associate professor,  RIE, Ajmer, for 
reviewing and refining the content of the textbook.
Special thanks are due to M. Chandra, Professor and Head, DESM, NCERT for  
her support.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the contribution of Surendra Kumar 
and Hari Darshan Lodhi DTP Operator; Subhash Saluja, Ramendra Kumar Sharma 
and Abhimanyu Mohanty, Proof Readers; Bhavna Saxena, Copy Editor and Deepak 
Kapoor, Incharge, Computer Station, in shaping this book. The contributions of 
the Publication Department in bringing out this book are also duly acknowledged.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 9 :
 9
answerS
Contents
	
Foreword	
iii
	
Rationalisation of Content in the Textbook	
v
Unit 7	
Redox Reactions	
235
	
7.1	
Classical Idea of Redox Reactions-Oxidation and Reduction Reactions	235
	
7.2	
Redox Reactions in Terms of Electron Transfer Reactions	
237
	
7.3	
Oxidation Number	
239
	
7.4	
Redox Reactions and Electrode Processes	
249
Unit 8	
Organic Chemistry – Some Basic Principles and Techniques	
256
	
8.1	
General Introduction	
256
	
8.2	
Tetravalence of Carbon: Shapes of Organic Compounds	
257
	
8.3 	
Structural Representations of Organic Compounds	
258
	
8.4	
Classification of Organic Compounds	
261
	
8.5	
Nomenclature of Organic Compounds	
262
	
8.6	
Isomerism	
270
	
8.7	
Fundamental Concepts in Organic Reaction Mechanism	
271
	
8.8	
Methods of Purification of Organic Compounds	
278
	
8.9	
Qualitative Analysis  of Organic Compounds	
284
	
8.10  Quantitative Analysis 	
285
Unit 9	
Hydrocarbons	
295
	
9.1	
Classification	
295
	
9.2	
Alkanes	
296
	
9.3	
Alkenes	
306
	
9.4	
Alkynes	
314
	
9.5	
Aromatic Hydrocarbon	
318
	
9.6	
Carcinogenicity and Toxicity	
325
	
Answers	
328
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 10 :
 10
chemistry
Contents of Chemistry Part I
Unit 1	
Some Basic Concepts of Chemistry	
1
Unit 2	
Structure of Atom	
29
Unit 3	
Classification of Elements and Periodicity in Properties	
74
Unit 4	
Chemical Bonding and Molecular Structure	
100
Unit 5	
Thermodynamics	
136
Unit 6	
Equilibrium	
168
	
Appendices	
215
	
Answer to Some Selected Questions	
229
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 1 :
 235
redox reactions
Chemistry deals with varieties of matter and change 
of one kind of matter into the other. Transformation of 
matter from one kind into another occurs through the 
various types of reactions. One important category of such 
reactions is Redox Reactions. A number of phenomena, 
both physical as well as biological, are concerned with 
redox reactions. These reactions find extensive use in 
pharmaceutical, biological, industrial, metallurgical and 
agricultural areas. The importance of these reactions is 
apparent from the fact that burning of different types of 
fuels for obtaining energy for domestic, transport and 
other commercial purposes, electrochemical processes 
for extraction of highly reactive metals and non-metals, 
manufacturing of  chemical  compounds like  caustic 
soda, operation of dry and wet batteries and corrosion of 
metals fall within the purview of redox processes. Of late, 
environmental issues like Hydrogen Economy (use of 
liquid hydrogen as fuel) and development of ‘Ozone Hole’ 
have started figuring under redox phenomenon. 
7.1 CLASSICAL IDEA OF REDOX REACTIONS – 
OXIDATION AND REDUCTION REACTIONS
Originally, the term oxidation was used to describe the 
addition of oxygen to an element or a compound. Because 
of the presence of dioxygen in the atmosphere (~20%), 
many elements combine with it and this is the principal 
reason why they commonly occur on the earth in the  
form of their oxides. The following reactions represent 
oxidation processes according to the limited definition of 
oxidation: 
2 Mg (s)  +  O2 (g)  →  2 MgO (s)	
(7.1)
S (s) + O2 (g)  →  SO2 (g)	
(7.2)
After studying this unit you will be 
able to 
•	
identify redox reactions as a class 
of reactions in which oxidation 
and reduction reactions occur 
simultaneously; 
•	
define the terms oxidation, 
reduction, oxidant (oxidising 
agent) and reductant (reducing 
agent); 
•	
explain mechanism of redox 
reactions by electron transfer 
process;
•	
use  the concept of oxidation 
number to identify oxidant and 
reductant in a reaction;
•	
classify redox reaction into 
combination (synthesis), 
decomposition, displacement 
a n d  d i s p r o p o r t i o n a t i o n 
reactions; 
•	
suggest a comparative order 
among various reductants and 
oxidants; 
•	
balance chemical equations 
using (i) oxidation number  
(ii) half reaction method;
•	
learn the concept of redox 
reactions in terms of electrode 
processes.
Unit 7
redox reactions
Where there is oxidation, there is always reduction –  
Chemistry is essentially a study of redox systems.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 2 :
 236
chemistry
In reactions (7.1) and (7.2), the elements 
magnesium and sulphur are oxidised on 
account of addition of oxygen to them. 
Similarly,  methane is oxidised owing to the 
addition of oxygen to it.
CH4 (g) + 2O2 (g) → CO2 (g) + 2H2O (l)	
(7.3)
A careful examination of reaction (7.3) in 
which hydrogen has been replaced by oxygen 
prompted chemists to reinterpret oxidation 
in terms of removal of hydrogen from it and, 
therefore, the scope of term oxidation was 
broadened to include the removal of hydrogen 
from a substance. The following illustration is 
another reaction where removal of hydrogen 
can also be cited as an oxidation reaction. 
2 H2S(g) + O2 (g) → 2 S (s) + 2 H2O (l)	
(7.4)
As knowledge of chemists grew, it was 
natural to extend the term oxidation for 
reactions similar to (7.1 to 7.4), which do 
not involve oxygen but other electronegative 
elements. The oxidation of magnesium with 
fluorine, chlorine and sulphur etc. occurs 
according to the following reactions : 
Mg (s) + F2 (g) → MgF2 (s)	
(7.5)
Mg (s) + Cl2 (g) → MgCl2 (s)	
(7.6)
Mg (s) + S (s) → MgS (s)	
(7.7)
Incorporating the reactions (7.5 to 
7.7) within the fold of oxidation reactions  
encouraged chemists to consider not only 
the removal of hydrogen as oxidation, but 
also the removal of electropositive elements 
as oxidation. Thus the reaction : 
2K4 [Fe(CN)6](aq) + H2O2 (aq) →2K3[Fe(CN)6](aq) 
+ 2 KOH (aq)
is interpreted as oxidation due to the removal 
of electropositive element potassium from 
potassium ferrocyanide before it changes to 
potassium ferricyanide. To summarise, the 
term “oxidation” is defined as the addition 
of oxygen/electronegative element to 
a substance or removal of hydrogen/
electropositive element from a substance.
In the beginning, reduction was considered 
as removal of oxygen from a compound. 
However, the term reduction has been 
broadened these days to include removal 
of oxygen/electronegative element from 
a substance or addition of hydrogen/
electropositive element to a substance. 
According to the definition given above, 
the following are the examples of reduction 
processes:
2 HgO (s) 
  2 Hg (l) + O2 (g)	
(7.8)
(removal of oxygen from mercuric oxide )
2 FeCl3 (aq) + H2 (g) →2 FeCl2 (aq) + 2 HCl(aq)
(7.9)
(removal of electronegative element, chlorine 
from ferric chloride)
CH2 = CH2 (g) + H2 (g) → H3C – CH3 (g) (7.10)
(addition of hydrogen)
2HgCl2 (aq) + SnCl2 (aq) → Hg2Cl2 (s)+SnCl4 (aq)
(7.11)
(addition of mercury to mercuric chloride)
In reaction (7.11) simultaneous oxidation 
of stannous chloride to stannic chloride is 
also occurring because of the addition of 
electronegative element chlorine to it. It was 
soon realised that oxidation and reduction 
always occur simultaneously (as will be 
apparent by re-examining all the equations 
given above), hence, the word “redox” was 
coined for this class of chemical reactions. 
Problem 7.1
In the reactions given below, identify 
the species undergoing oxidation and 
reduction: 
(i)  H2S (g) + Cl2 (g) → 2 HCl (g) + S (s)
(ii) 3Fe3O4 (s) + 8 Al (s) → 9 Fe (s) 
                                                 + 4Al2O3 (s)
(iii) 2 Na (s) + H2 (g) → 2 NaH (s)
Solution  
(i) H2S is oxidised because a more 
electronegative element, chlorine is added 
to hydrogen (or a more electropositive 
element, hydrogen has been removed  
from S). Chlorine is reduced due to 
addition of hydrogen to it.
(ii)  Aluminium is oxidised because 
oxygen is added to it. Ferrous ferric oxide 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 3 :
 237
redox reactions
(Fe3O4) is reduced because oxygen has 
been removed from it. 
(iii)  With the careful application of the 
concept of electronegativity only we 
may infer that sodium is oxidised and 
hydrogen is reduced. 
Reaction (iii) chosen here prompts us to 
think in terms of another way to define 
redox reactions. 
7.2	 REDOX REACTIONS IN TERMS OF 
ELECTRON  TRANSFER REACTIONS
We have already learnt that the reactions 
2Na(s) + Cl2(g)	 →  2NaCl (s)	
(7.12)
4Na(s) + O2(g)	 →  2Na2O(s)	
(7.13)
2Na(s) + S(s)	
→  Na2S(s)	
(7.14)
are redox reactions because in each of these 
reactions sodium is oxidised due to the addition 
of either oxygen or more electronegative 
element to sodium. Simultaneously, chlorine, 
oxygen and sulphur are reduced because to 
each of these, the electropositive element 
sodium has been added. From our knowledge 
of chemical bonding we also know that sodium 
chloride, sodium oxide and sodium sulphide 
are ionic compounds and perhaps better 
written as Na+Cl– (s), (Na+)2O2–(s), and (Na+)2 
S2–(s). Development of charges on the species 
produced suggests us to rewrite the reactions 
(7.12 to 7.14) in the following manner : 
For convenience, each of the above 
processes can be considered as two separate 
steps, one involving the loss of electrons 
and the other the gain of electrons. As an 
illustration, we may further elaborate one of 
these, say, the formation of  sodium chloride. 
2 Na(s) → 2 Na+(g)   +   2e–
Cl2(g) + 2e– → 2 Cl–(g)
Each of the above steps is called a half 
reaction, which explicitly shows involvement 
of electrons. Sum of the half reactions gives 
the overall reaction : 
2 Na(s) + Cl2 (g)  → 2 Na+ Cl– (s) or 2 NaCl (s)
Reactions 7.12 to 7.14 suggest that half 
reactions that involve loss of electrons are 
called oxidation reactions. Similarly, the 
half reactions that involve gain of electrons 
are called reduction reactions.  It may not 
be out of context to mention here that the 
new way of defining oxidation and reduction 
has been achieved only by establishing a 
correlation between the behaviour of species 
as per the classical idea and their interplay 
in electron-transfer change. In reactions (7.12 
to 7.14) sodium, which is oxidised, acts as  
a reducing agent because it donates electron 
to each of the elements interacting with it and 
thus helps in reducing them. Chlorine, oxygen 
and sulphur are reduced and act as oxidising 
agents because these accept electrons from 
sodium. To summarise, we may mention that 
Oxidation : Loss of electron(s) by any species.
Reduction : Gain of electron(s) by any species.
Oxidising agent : Acceptor of electron(s).
Reducing agent : Donor of electron(s).
Problem 7.2  Justify that the reaction:
2 Na(s) + H2(g) →  2 NaH (s) is a redox 
change.
Solution
Since in the above reaction the compound 
formed is an ionic compound, which may 
also be represented as Na+H– (s), this 
suggests that one half reaction in this 
process is : 
2 Na (s)	
→ 2 Na+(g)  +   2e–
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 4 :
 238
chemistry
and the other half reaction is: 
H2 (g) + 2e– →  2 H–(g)
This splitting of the reaction under 
examination into two half reactions 
automatically reveals that here sodium 
is oxidised and hydrogen is reduced, 
therefore, the complete reaction is a 
redox change. 
7.2.1	 Competitive Electron Transfer 
Reactions
Place a strip of metallic zinc in an aqueous 
solution of copper nitrate as shown in Fig. 
7.1, for about one hour. You may notice 
that the  strip becomes coated with reddish 
metallic copper and the blue colour of the 
solution disappears. Formation of  Zn2+ ions 
among the products can easily be  judged 
when the blue colour of the solution due to 
Cu2+ has disappeared. If hydrogen sulphide 
gas is passed through the colourless solution 
containing Zn2+ ions, appearance of white zinc 
sulphide, ZnS can be seen on making the 
solution alkaline with ammonia. 
The reaction between metallic zinc and the 
aqueous solution of copper nitrate is : 
Zn(s) + Cu2+ (aq) → Zn2+ (aq) + Cu(s)     (7.15)
In reaction (7.15), zinc has lost electrons 
to form Zn2+ and, therefore, zinc is oxidised. 
Evidently, now if zinc is oxidised, releasing 
electrons, something must be reduced, 
accepting the electrons lost by zinc. Copper 
ion is reduced by gaining electrons from the zinc. 
Reaction (7.15) may be rewritten as : 
At this stage we may investigate the state 
of equilibrium for the reaction represented by 
equation (7.15). For this purpose, let us place 
a strip of metallic copper in a zinc sulphate 
solution. No visible reaction is noticed and 
attempt to detect the presence of Cu2+ ions 
by passing H2S gas through the solution to 
produce the black colour of cupric sulphide, 
CuS, does not succeed. Cupric sulphide has 
such a low solubility that this is an extremely 
sensitive test; yet the amount of Cu2+ formed 
cannot be detected. We thus conclude that 
the state of equilibrium for the reaction (7.15) 
greatly favours the products over the reactants. 
Let us extend electron transfer reaction 
now to copper metal and silver nitrate solution 
in water and arrange a set-up as shown in  
Fig. 7.2. The solution develops blue colour 
due to the formation of Cu2+ ions on account 
of the reaction:
Fig. 7.1  Redox reaction between zinc and aqueous solution of copper nitrate occurring in a beaker.
(7.16)
Here, Cu(s) is oxidised to Cu2+(aq) and  
Ag+(aq) is reduced to Ag(s). Equilibrium greatly 
favours the products Cu2+ (aq) and Ag(s).
By way of contrast, let us also compare 
the reaction of metallic cobalt placed in nickel 
sulphate solution. The reaction that occurs 
here is : 
(7.17)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 5 :
 239
redox reactions
Fig. 7.2  Redox reaction between copper and aqueous solution of silver nitrate occurring in a beaker. 
At equilibrium, chemical tests reveal that both 
Ni2+(aq) and Co2+(aq)  are present at moderate 
concentrations. In this case, neither the 
reactants [Co(s) and Ni2+(aq)] nor the products 
[Co2+(aq) and Ni (s)] are greatly favoured. 
This competition for release of electrons 
incidently reminds us of the competition for 
release of  protons among acids.  The similarity 
suggests that we might develop a table in 
which metals and their ions are listed  on the 
basis of their tendency to release electrons 
just as we do in the case of acids to indicate 
the strength of the acids. As a matter of fact 
we have already made certain comparisons. 
By comparison we have come to know that 
zinc releases electrons to copper and copper 
releases electrons to silver and, therefore, 
the electron releasing tendency of the metals 
is in the order: Zn>Cu>Ag. We would love to 
make our list more vast and design a metal 
activity series or electrochemical series. 
The competition for electrons between various 
metals helps us to design a class of cells, 
named as Galvanic cells in which the chemical 
reactions become the source of electrical 
energy. We would study more about these 
cells in Class XII.
7.3	 OXIDATION NUMBER
A less obvious example of electron transfer is 
realised when hydrogen combines with oxygen 
to form water by the reaction:
2H2(g) + O2 (g) →  2H2O (l)	
    	
(7.18)
Though not simple in its approach, yet 
we can visualise the H atom as going from a 
neutral (zero) state in H2 to a positive state in 
H2O, the O atom goes from a zero state in O2 
to a dinegative state in H2O. It is assumed that 
there is an electron transfer from H to O and 
consequently H2 is oxidised and O2 is reduced. 
However, as we shall see later, the charge 
transfer is only partial and is perhaps better 
described as an electron shift rather than a 
complete loss of electron by H and gain by 
O. What has been said here with respect 
to equation (7.18) may be true for a good 
number of other reactions involving covalent 
compounds. Two such examples of this class 
of the reactions are:
H2(s) + Cl2(g)   →  2HCl(g)	
	
   (7.19)
and,
CH 4(g)  +  4Cl2(g)  → CCl4(l)  + 4HCl(g)    (7.20)
In order to keep track of electron shifts 
in chemical reactions involving formation 
of covalent compounds, a more practical 
method of using oxidation number has 
been developed. In this method, it is always 
assumed that there is a complete transfer 
of electron from a less electronegative atom 
to a more electonegative atom. For example, 
we rewrite equations (7.18 to 7.20) to show 
charge on each of the atoms forming part of 
the reaction : 
  0           0              +1 –2
2H2(g) + O2(g)	 →  2H2O (l)	
(7.21)
0            0	
           +1 –1
H2 (s) + Cl2(g)	 →  2HCl(g)	
(7.22)
–4+1	
         0          +4 –1        +1 –1 
CH4(g)  + 4Cl2(g) →  CCl4(l)  +4HCl(g)	
(7.23)
It may be emphasised that the assumption 
of electron transfer is made for book-keeping 
purpose only and it will become obvious at 
a later stage in this unit that it leads to the 
simple description of redox reactions. 
Oxidation number denotes the oxidation 
state of an element in a compound 
ascertained according to a set of rules 
formulated on the basis that electron pair 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 6 :
 240
chemistry
in a covalent bond belongs entirely to more 
electronegative element. 
It is not always possible to remember or 
make out easily in a compound/ion, which 
element is more electronegative than the 
other. Therefore, a set of rules has been 
formulated to determine the oxidation 
number of an element in a compound/ion. 
If two or more than two atoms of an element 
are present in the molecule/ion such as 
Na2S2O3/Cr2O7 
2–, the oxidation number of the 
atom of that element will then be the average 
of the oxidation number of all the atoms of 
that element. We may at this stage, state the 
rules for the calculation of oxidation number. 
These rules are: 
1.	 In elements, in the free or the uncombined 
state, each atom bears an oxidation 
number of zero. Evidently each atom in 
H2, O2, Cl2, O3, P4, S8, Na, Mg, Al has the 
oxidation number zero. 
2.	 For ions composed of only one atom, the 
oxidation number is equal to the charge 
on the ion. Thus Na+ ion has an oxidation 
number of +1, Mg2+ ion, +2, Fe3+ ion, +3, 
Cl– ion, –1, O2– ion, –2; and so on. In their 
compounds all alkali metals have oxidation 
number of +1, and all alkaline earth metals 
have an oxidation number of +2. Aluminium 
is regarded to have an oxidation number of 
+3 in all its compounds. 
3.	 The oxidation number of oxygen in most 
compounds is –2. However, we come 
across two kinds of exceptions here. 
One arises in the case of peroxides and 
superoxides, the compounds of oxygen in 
which oxygen atoms are directly linked to 
each other. While in peroxides (e.g., H2O2, 
Na2O2), each oxygen atom is assigned an 
oxidation number of –1, in superoxides 
(e.g., KO2, RbO2) each oxygen atom is 
assigned an oxidation number of –(½). 
The second exception appears rarely, i.e. 
when oxygen is bonded to fluorine. In 
such compounds e.g., oxygen difluoride 
(OF2) and dioxygen difluoride (O2F2), the 
oxygen is assigned an oxidation number 
of +2 and +1, respectively. The number 
assigned to oxygen will depend upon the 
bonding state of oxygen but this number 
would now be a positive figure only. 
4.	 The oxidation number of hydrogen is +1, 
except when it is bonded to metals in binary 
compounds (that is compounds containing 
two elements). For example, in LiH, NaH, 
and CaH2, its oxidation number is –1. 
5.	 In all its compounds, fluorine has an 
oxidation number of –1. Other halogens (Cl, 
Br, and I) also have an oxidation number 
of –1, when they occur as halide ions in 
their compounds. Chlorine, bromine and 
iodine when combined with oxygen, for 
example in oxoacids and oxoanions, have 
positive oxidation numbers. 
6.	 The algebraic sum of the oxidation number 
of all the atoms in a compound must be 
zero. In polyatomic ion, the algebraic sum 
of all the oxidation numbers of atoms of 
the ion must equal the charge on the ion. 
Thus, the sum of oxidation number of three 
oxygen atoms and one carbon atom in the 
carbonate ion, (CO3)2– must equal –2. 
By the application of above rules, we can 
find out the oxidation number of the desired 
element in a molecule or in an ion. It is clear 
that the metallic elements have positive 
oxidation number and nonmetallic elements 
have positive or negative oxidation number. 
The atoms of transition elements usually 
display several positive oxidation states. The 
highest oxidation number of a representative 
element is the group number for the first 
two groups and the group number minus 10 
(following the long form of periodic table) for 
the other groups. Thus, it implies that the 
highest value of oxidation number exhibited 
by an atom of an element generally increases 
across the period in the periodic table. In the 
third period, the highest value of oxidation 
number changes from 1 to 7 as indicated 
below in the compounds of the elements.
A term that is often used interchangeably 
with the oxidation number is the oxidation 
state. Thus in CO2, the oxidation state of 
carbon is +4, that is also its oxidation number 
and similarly the oxidation state as well 
as oxidation number of oxygen is – 2. This 
implies that the oxidation number denotes the 
oxidation state of an element in a compound. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 7 :
 241
redox reactions
The oxidation number/state of a metal in a 
compound is sometimes presented according 
to the notation given by German chemist, 
Alfred Stock. It is popularly known as Stock 
notation. According to this, the oxidation 
number is expressed by putting a Roman 
numeral representing the oxidation number 
in parenthesis after the symbol of the metal in 
the molecular formula. Thus aurous chloride 
and auric chloride are written as Au(I)Cl and 
Au(III)Cl3. Similarly, stannous chloride and 
stannic chloride are written as Sn(II)Cl2 and 
Sn(IV)Cl4. This change in oxidation number 
implies change in oxidation state, which in 
turn helps to identify whether the species 
is present in oxidised form or reduced form. 
Thus, Hg2(I)Cl2 is the reduced form of Hg(II) Cl2. 
Problem 7.3
Using Stock notation, represent the 
following compounds :HAuCl4, Tl2O, FeO,   
Fe2O3, CuI, CuO, MnO and MnO2.    
Solution 
By applying various rules of calculating 
the oxidation number of the desired 
element in a compound, the oxidation 
number of each metallic element in its 
compound is as follows:
HAuCl4 	
→	
Au has 3
Tl2O	
→	
Tl has 1
FeO	
→	
Fe has 2
Fe2O3	
→	
Fe has 3	
CuI	
→	
Cu has 1
CuO	
→	
Cu has 2
MnO	
→	
Mn has 2
MnO2	
→	
Mn has 4
Therefore, these compounds may be 
represented as:
HAu(III)Cl4, Tl2(I)O, Fe(II)O, Fe2(III)O3, 
Cu(I)I, Cu(II)O, Mn(II)O, Mn(IV)O2.
The idea of oxidation number has been 
invariably applied to define oxidation, 
reduction, oxidising agent (oxidant), reducing 
agent (reductant) and the redox reaction. To 
summarise, we may say that:
Oxidation: An increase in the oxidation 
number of the element in the given substance. 
Reduction 	
: A decrease in the oxidation 
number of the element in the given substance.
Oxidising agent: A reagent which can 
increase the oxidation number of an element 
in a given substance. These reagents are 
called as oxidants also.
Reducing agent: A reagent which lowers the 
oxidation number of an element in a given 
substance. These reagents are also called as 
reductants.
Redox reactions: Reactions which involve 
change in oxidation number of the interacting 
species.
Problem 7.4
Justify that the reaction:
2Cu2O(s) + Cu2S(s)  →   6Cu(s) + SO2(g)
is a redox reaction. Identify the species 
oxidised/reduced, which acts as an 
oxidant and which acts as a reductant.
Solution
Let us assign oxidation number to each 
of the species in the reaction under 
examination. This results into:
  +1  –2        +1  –2	
         0        +4 –2
2Cu2O(s) + Cu2S(s)  →  6Cu(s) + SO2
We therefore, conclude that in this 
reaction copper is reduced from  +1 state 
to zero oxidation state and sulphur is 
oxidised from –2 state to +4 state. The 
above reaction is thus a redox reaction. 
Group
1
2
13
14
15
16
17
Element
Na
Mg
Al
Si
P
S
Cl
Compound
NaCl
MgSO4
AlF3
SiCl4
P4O10
SF6
HClO
Highest oxidation 
number state of 
the group element
+1
+2
+3
+4
+5
+6
+7
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 8 :
 242
chemistry
Further, Cu2O helps sulphur in Cu2S to 
increase its oxidation number, therefore, 
Cu(I) is an oxidant; and sulphur of Cu2S 
helps copper both in Cu2S itself and 
Cu2O to decrease its oxidation number; 
therefore, sulphur of Cu2S is reductant. 
7.3.1	 Types of Redox Reactions
1. Combination reactions 
A combination reaction may be denoted in 
the manner:
A + B  →   C
Either A and B or both A and B must be in 
the elemental form for such a reaction to be 
a redox reaction. All combustion reactions, 
which make use of elemental dioxygen, as well 
as other reactions involving elements other 
than dioxygen, are redox reactions. Some 
important examples of this category are:
0           0	
             +4 –2
C(s)  +  O2 (g)  
    CO2(g)	
(7.24)
   0	
      0	
	
     +2  –3
3Mg(s) + N2(g) 
   Mg3N2(s)	
(7.25)
–4+1	
          0            +4 –2               +1 –2
CH4(g)  +  2O2(g)
  CO2(g)   +    2H2O (l)
2. Decomposition reactions 
Decomposition reactions are the opposite 
of combination reactions. Precisely, a 
decomposition reaction leads to the breakdown 
of a compound into two or more components 
at least one of which must be in the elemental 
state. Examples of this class of reactions are:
+1 –2	
	
       0           0
2H2O (l) 
   2H2 (g) + O2(g)	
(7.26)
+1 –1                    0            0
2NaH (s) 
    2Na (s) + H2(g)	
(7.27)
+1 +5 –2                 +1 –1           0
2KClO3 (s) 
    2KCl (s)  + 3O2(g)	
(7.28)
It may carefully be noted that there is no 
change in the oxidation number of hydrogen 
in methane under combination reactions 
and that of potassium in potassium chlorate 
in reaction (7.28). This may also be noted 
here that all decomposition reactions are not 
redox reactions. For example, decomposition 
of calcium carbonate is not a redox reaction.
+2 +4 –2		
+2 –2	
          +4 –2
CaCO3 (s) 
     CaO(s)    +    CO2(g)	
3. Displacement reactions 
In a displacement reaction, an ion (or an 
atom) in a compound is replaced by an ion 
(or an atom) of another element. It may be 
denoted as:
	
X  + YZ  →  XZ  + Y	
Displacement reactions fit into two 
categories: metal displacement and non-metal 
displacement.
(a) Metal displacement: A metal in a 
compound can be displaced by another metal 
in the uncombined state. We have already 
discussed about this class of the reactions 
under section 7.2.1. Metal displacement 
reactions find many applications in 
metallurgical processes in which pure metals 
are obtained from their compounds in ores. A 
few such examples are:
+2 +6 –2	   	
0	
  0        +2 +6 –2
CuSO4(aq) + Zn (s) → Cu(s) + ZnSO4 (aq) 	 	
	
	
	
	
	
      (7.29)
+5 –2	
           0		
 0	
     +2 –2
V2O5 (s) + 5Ca (s) 
   2V (s) + 5CaO (s)	
	
	
	
	
	
      (7.30)
+4 –1	
          0	         0             +2 –1
TiCl4 (l) + 2Mg (s) 
  Ti (s) + 2 MgCl2 (s)
	
	
	
	
	
      (7.31)
+3 –2	
             0	
         	
 +3 –2             0
Cr2O3 (s) + 2 Al (s) 
  Al2O3 (s) + 2Cr(s)	
	
	
	
	
	
	
      (7.32)
In each case, the reducing metal is a 
better reducing agent than the one that is 
being reduced which evidently shows more 
capability to lose electrons as compared to 
the one that is reduced.
(b) Non-metal displacement: The non-
metal displacement redox reactions include 
hydrogen displacement and a rarely occurring 
reaction involving oxygen displacement.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 9 :
 243
redox reactions
All alkali metals and some alkaline earth 
metals (Ca, Sr, and Ba) which are very good 
reductants, will displace hydrogen from cold 
water.
   0          +1 –2               +1 –2 +1          0
2Na(s) + 2H2O(l)	
→	
2NaOH(aq) + H2(g)
(7.33)
  0  	
      +1 –2             +2 –2 +1            0
Ca(s)  +  2H2O(l)	
→	
Ca(OH)2 (aq) + H2(g) 
(7.34)
Less active metals such as magnesium and 
iron react with steam to produce dihydrogen gas:
 0  	
      +1 –2             +2 –2 +1	 	
0 
Mg(s)  +  2H2O(l) 
   Mg(OH)2(s) + H2(g) 	
	
	
	
	
	
      (7.35)
  0  	
      +1 –2            +3 –2            0
2Fe(s) + 3H2O(l)  
   Fe2O3(s) + 3H2(g)   (7.36)
Many metals, including those which do not 
react with cold water, are capable of displacing 
hydrogen from acids. Dihydrogen from acids 
may even be produced by such metals which 
do not react with steam. Cadmium and tin are 
the examples of such metals. A few examples 
for the displacement of hydrogen from acids 
are:
  0         +1 –1	
	
+2 –1	
          0
Zn(s) + 2HCl(aq)  →  ZnCl2 (aq) + H2 (g)
	
	
	
	
	
      (7.37)
 0           +1 –1	
         +2 –1             0
Mg (s) + 2HCl (aq)  →  MgCl2 (aq) + H2 (g)
	
	
	
	
	
      (7.38)
 0	
    +1 –1	       +2 –1           0
Fe(s)	
+ 2HCl(aq)  →  FeCl2(aq) + H2(g)	
	
	
	
	
	
      (7.39)
Reactions (7.37 to 7.39) are used to 
prepare dihydrogen gas in the laboratory. 
Here, the reactivity of metals is reflected in 
the rate of hydrogen gas evolution, which is 
the slowest for the least active metal Fe, and 
the fastest for the most reactive metal, Mg. 
Very less active metals, which may occur in 
the native state such as silver (Ag), and gold 
(Au) do not react even with hydrochloric acid.
In section (7.2.1) we have already discussed 
that the metals – zinc (Zn), copper (Cu) and 
silver (Ag) through tendency to lose electrons 
show their reducing activity in the order Zn> 
Cu>Ag. Like metals, activity series also exists 
for the halogens. The power of these elements 
as oxidising agents decreases as we move 
down from fluorine to iodine in group 17 of the 
periodic table. This implies that fluorine is so 
reactive that it can replace chloride, bromide 
and iodide ions in solution. In fact, fluorine is 
so reactive that it attacks water and displaces 
the oxygen of water : 
 +1 –2           0	
       +1 –1	
       0
2H2O (l) + 2F2 (g)  → 4HF(aq)  + O2(g)     (7.40)
It is for this reason that the displacement 
reactions of chlorine, bromine and iodine 
using fluorine are not generally carried out in 
aqueous solution. On the other hand, chlorine 
can displace bromide and iodide ions in an 
aqueous solution as shown below: 
 0	
    +1 –1	          +1 –1           0
Cl2 (g) + 2KBr (aq)  → 2 KCl (aq) + Br2 (l) 
	
	
	
	
	
      (7.41)
 0	
    +1–1	         +1 –1            0
Cl2 (g) + 2KI (aq)  →  2 KCl (aq)  +  I2 (s)	
	
	
	
	
	
(7.42)
As Br2 and I2 are coloured and dissolve in CCl4, 
can easily be identified from the colour of the 
solution. The above reactions can be written 
in ionic form as: 
  0	
      –1	
        –1    	
      0
Cl2 (g) + 2Br– (aq) → 2Cl– (aq) + Br2 (l)  (7.41a)
 0            –1    	
                 –1            0
Cl2 (g) + 2I– (aq)  →  2Cl– (aq) + I2 (s)    (7.42b)
Reactions (7.41) and (7.42) form the basis 
of identifying Br– and I– in the laboratory 
through the test popularly known as ‘Layer 
Test’. It may not be out of place to mention 
here that bromine likewise can displace iodide 
ion in solution:
 0	
     –1	
               –1            0
Br2 (l)  + 2I – (aq) → 2Br– (aq) + I2 (s)	      (7.43)
The halogen displacement reactions have 
a direct industrial application. The recovery 
of halogens from their halides requires an 
oxidation process, which is represented by: 
2X– 	
→   X2   +  2e–	 	
	
      (7.44)
here X denotes a halogen element. Whereas 
chemical means are available to oxidise Cl–, 
Br– and I–, as fluorine is the strongest oxidising 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 10 :
 244
chemistry
agent; there is no way to convert F– ions to F2 
by chemical means. The only way to achieve 
F2 from F– is to oxidise electrolytically, the 
details of which you will study at a later stage. 
4. Disproportionation reactions  
Disproportionation reactions are a special type 
of redox reactions. In a disproportionation 
reaction an element in one oxidation state 
is simultaneously oxidised and reduced.  
One of the reacting substances in a 
disproportionation reaction always contains 
an element that can exist in at least three 
oxidation states. The element in the form 
of reacting substance is in the intermediate 
oxidation state; and both higher and lower 
oxidation states of that element are formed in 
the reaction. The decomposition of hydrogen 
peroxide is a familiar example of the reaction, 
where oxygen experiences disproportionation.
+1 –1	
                +1  –2        0
2H2O2 (aq)  →  2H2O(l) +  O2(g)	
      (7.45)
Here the oxygen of peroxide, which is present 
in –1 state, is converted to zero oxidation state 
in O2 and decreases to –2 oxidation state in 
H2O. 
Phosphorous, sulphur and chlorine 
undergo disproportionation in the alkaline 
medium as shown below : 
0	
                                         –3      	
          +1
P4(s) + 3OH–(aq)+ 3H2O(l) → PH3(g) + 3H2PO2
– 	
	
(aq) 	
	
(7.46)
0	
            	   	
    –2                +2 
S8(s) + 12 OH– (aq) →  4S2– (aq) + 2S2O3
2–(aq) 
	
+ 6H2O(l) 	
	
(7.47)
0	
	
	
            +1               –1
Cl2 (g) + 2 OH– (aq)  →     ClO– (aq) + Cl– (aq) +
	
H2O (l) 	
	
(7.48)
The reaction (7.48) describes the 
formation of household bleaching agents. 
The hypochlorite ion (ClO–) formed in the 
reaction oxidises the colour-bearing stains 
of the substances to colourless compounds. 
It is of interest to mention here that whereas 
bromine and iodine follow the same trend 
as exhibited by chlorine in reaction (7.48),  
fluorine shows deviation from this behaviour 
when it reacts with alkali. The reaction that 
takes place in the case of fluorine is as follows: 
2 F2(g) + 2OH–(aq) → 2 F–(aq) + OF2(g) + H2O(l)
 	
(7.49)
(It is to be noted with care that fluorine in 
reaction (7.49) will undoubtedly attack water 
to produce some oxygen also). This departure 
shown by fluorine is not surprising for us as 
we know the limitation of fluorine that, being 
the most electronegative element, it cannot 
exhibit any positive oxidation state. This 
means that among halogens, fluorine does not 
show a disproportionation tendency. 
Problem 7.5 
Which of the following species, do not 
show disproportionation reaction and 
why ? 
ClO–, ClO2
–, ClO3
– and ClO4 
–
Also write reaction for each of the species 
that disproportionates. 
Solution 
Among the oxoanions of chlorine listed 
above, ClO4
– does not disproportionate 
because in this oxoanion chlorine is 
present in its highest oxidation state that 
is, +7. The disproportionation reactions 
for the other three oxoanions of chlorine 
are as follows:
  +1 	
	
  –1        +5
3ClO–	 →	 2Cl– + ClO–
3
   +3	 	
  +5            –1
6 ClO2
– 
 
 	4ClO3
–  +  2Cl–
  +5	
	
–1           +7
4ClO–
3	 →	 Cl–  +   3 ClO4
–
Problem 7.6      
Suggest a scheme of classification of the 
following redox reactions
(a) N2 (g) + O2 (g)  → 2 NO (g)
(b) 2Pb(NO3)2(s)  → 2PbO(s) + 4 NO2 (g) + 
	
	
	
	
	
O2 (g)
(c) NaH(s) + H2O(l) → NaOH(aq) + H2 (g)
(d) 2NO2(g) + 2OH–(aq) →  NO2
–(aq) + 
                                          NO3
– (aq)+H2O(l)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 11 :
 245
redox reactions
Solution
In reaction (a), the compound nitric 
oxide is formed by the combination of 
the elemental substances, nitrogen and 
oxygen; therefore, this is an example 
of combination redox reactions. The 
reaction (b) involves the breaking down 
of lead nitrate into three components; 
therefore, this is categorised under 
decomposition redox reaction. In 
The Paradox of Fractional Oxidation Number
Sometimes, we come across with certain compounds in which the oxidation number of a particular 
element in the compound is in fraction. Examples are:
C3O2 [where oxidation number of carbon  is (4/3)], 
Br3O8 [where oxidation number of bromine is (16/3)] 
and Na2S4O6 (where oxidation number of sulphur is 2.5).
We know that the idea of fractional oxidation number is unconvincing to us, because electrons 
are never shared/transferred in fraction. Actually this fractional oxidation state is the average 
oxidation state of the element under examination and the structural parameters reveal that the 
element for whom fractional oxidation state is realised is present in different oxidation states. 
Structure of the species C3O2, Br3O8 and S4O6
2– reveal  the following bonding situations:  	
	
	
                      
	 	
	
	
	
             +2    0    +2
O = C = C*= C = O
Structure of C3O2 
(carbon suboxide)
    Structure of Br3O8  (tribromooctaoxide)	
	
	
Structure of S4O6
2– (tetrathionate ion) 
The element marked with asterisk in each species is exhibiting the different oxidation 
state (oxidation number) from rest of the atoms  of the same element in each of the species. 
This reveals that in C3O2, two carbon atoms are present in +2 oxidation state each, whereas 
the third one is present in zero oxidation state and the average is 4/3. However, the realistic 
picture is +2 for two terminal carbons and zero for the middle carbon. Likewise in Br3O8, each 
of the two terminal bromine atoms are present in +6 oxidation state and the middle bromine 
is present in +4 oxidation state. Once again the average, that is different from reality, is  
16/3. In the same fashion, in the species S4O6
2–, each of the two extreme sulphurs exhibits oxidation 
state of +5 and the two middle sulphurs as zero. The average of four  oxidation numbers of sulphurs 
of the S4O6
2– is 2.5, whereas the reality being + 5,0,0 and +5 oxidation number respectively for 
each sulphur.
We may thus, in general, conclude that the idea of fractional oxidation state should be taken 
with care and the reality is revealed by the structures only. Further, whenever we come across 
with fractional oxidation state of any particular element in any species, we must understand that 
this is the average oxidation number only. In reality (revealed by structures only), the element in 
that particular species is present in more than one whole number oxidation states. Fe3O4, Mn3O4, 
Pb3O4 are some of the other examples of the compounds, which are mixed oxides, where we come 
across with fractional oxidation states of the metal atom. However, the oxidation states may be in 
fraction as in O2
+ and O2
– where it is +½ and –½ respectively.
reaction (c), hydrogen of water has been 
displaced by hydride ion into dihydrogen 
gas. Therefore, this may be called as 
displacement redox reaction. The reaction 
(d) involves disproportionation of NO2  
(+4 state)  into NO2
– (+3 state) and NO3
– 
(+5 state). Therefore reaction (d) is an 
example of disproportionation redox 
reaction.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 12 :
 246
chemistry
Problem 7.8
Write the net ionic equation for the 
reaction of potassium dichromate(VI), 
K2Cr2O7 with sodium sulphite, Na2SO3, 
in an acid solution to give chromium(III) 
ion and the sulphate  ion. 
Problem 7.7
Why do the following reactions proceed 
differently ?
Pb3O4 + 8HCl → 3PbCl2 + Cl2 + 4H2O   and
Pb3O4 + 4HNO3 → 2Pb(NO3)2 + PbO2 + 	 	
                                2H2O
Solution
Pb3O4  is actually a stoichiometric 
mixture of 2 mol of PbO and 1 mol of 
PbO2. In PbO2, lead is present in +4 
oxidation state, whereas the stable 
oxidation state of lead in PbO is +2. PbO2 
thus can act as an oxidant (oxidising 
agent) and, therefore, can oxidise Cl– ion 
of HCl into chlorine. We may also keep in 
mind that PbO is a basic oxide. Therefore, 
the reaction
Pb3O4 + 8HCl → 3PbCl2 + Cl2 + 4H2O  
can be splitted into two reactions namely:
2PbO + 4HCl → 2PbCl2 + 2H2O   	
	
(acid-base reaction)
+4              –1	              +2          0
PbO2 + 4HCl →  PbCl2 + Cl2 +2H2O   	
(redox reaction)
Since HNO3 itself is an oxidising agent 
therefore, it is unlikely that the reaction 
may occur between PbO2 and HNO3. 
However, the acid-base reaction occurs 
between PbO and HNO3 as:
2PbO + 4HNO3 → 2Pb(NO3)2 + 2H2O
It is the passive nature of PbO2 against 
HNO3 that makes the reaction different 
from the one that follows with HCl.
(a) Oxidation Number Method: In writing 
equations for oxidation-reduction reactions, 
just as for other reactions, the compositions and 
formulas must be known for the substances 
that react and for the products that are 
formed. The oxidation number method is now 
best illustrated in the following steps:
Step 1: Write the correct formula for each 
reactant and product.
Step 2: Identify atoms which undergo 
change in oxidation number in the reaction 
by assigning the oxidation number to all 
elements in the reaction.
Step 3: Calculate the increase or decrease 
in the oxidation number per atom and for 
the entire molecule/ion in which it occurs. If 
these are not equal then multiply by suitable 
number so that these become equal. (If you 
realise that two substances are reduced and 
nothing is oxidised or vice-versa, something 
is wrong. Either the formulas of reactants or 
products are wrong or the oxidation numbers 
have not been assigned properly).
Step 4: Ascertain the involvement of ions if 
the reaction is taking place in water, add H+ or 
OH– ions to the expression on the appropriate 
side so that the total ionic charges of reactants 
and products are equal. If the reaction is 
carried out in acidic solution, use H+ ions in 
the equation; if in basic solution, use OH– ions. 
Step 5 :  Make the numbers of hydrogen 
atoms in the expression on the two sides 
equal by adding water (H2O) molecules to the 
reactants or products. Now, also check the 
number of oxygen atoms. If there are the same 
number of oxygen atoms in the reactants and 
products, the equation then represents the 
balanced redox reaction. 
Let us now explain the steps involved in 
the method with the help of a few problems 
given below: 
7.3.2	 Balancing of Redox Reactions
Two methods are used to balance chemical 
equations for redox processes. One of these 
methods is based on the change in the 
oxidation number of reducing agent and the 
oxidising agent and the other method is based 
on splitting the redox reaction into two half 
reactions — one involving oxidation and the 
other involving reduction. Both these methods 
are in use and the choice of their use rests 
with the individual using them.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 13 :
 247
redox reactions
Solution 
Step 1: The skeletal ionic equation is: 
Cr2O7
2–(aq) + SO3
2–(aq) → Cr3+(aq) 
	
+ SO4
2–(aq)
Step 2: Assign oxidation numbers for 
Cr and S
+6  –2     	
      +4 –2        	
    +3          +6 –2
Cr2O7
2–(aq) + SO3
2–(aq) → Cr(aq)+SO4
2–(aq)
This indicates that the dichromate ion is 
the oxidant and the sulphite ion is the 
reductant.
Step 3: Calculate the increase and 
decrease of oxidation number, and make 
them equal: from step-2 we can notice 
that there is change in oxidation state 
of chromium and sulphur. Oxidation 
state of chromium changes form +6 to 
+3. There is decrease of +3 in oxidation 
state of chromium on right hand side of 
the equation. Oxidation state of sulphur 
changes from +4 to +6. There is an increase 
of +2 in the oxidation state of sulphur on 
right hand side. To make the increase and 
decrease of oxidation state equal, place 
numeral 2 before cromium ion on right 
hand side and numeral 3 before sulphate 
ion on right hand side and balance the 
chromium and sulphur atoms on both the 
sides of  the equation. Thus we get
+6 –2	                +4 –2          	
    +3	
       
Cr2O7
2–(aq) + 3SO3
2– (aq)  → 2Cr3+ (aq) +  		
	
	
	
	
	
+6 –2
3SO4
2– (aq)
Step 4: As the reaction occurs in the 
acidic medium, and further the ionic 
charges are not equal on both the sides, 
add 8H+ on the left to make ionic charges 
equal 
Cr2O7
2–(aq) + 3SO3
2–(aq)+ 8H+→ 2Cr3+(aq) 	
	
+ 3SO4
2– (aq)
Step 5: Finally, count the hydrogen 
atoms, and add appropriate number of 
water molecules (i.e., 4H2O) on the right 
to achieve balanced redox change. 
Cr2O7
2– (aq) + 3SO3
2– (aq)+ 8H+ (aq) → 
	
2Cr3+ (aq) + 3SO4
2– (aq) +4H2O (l)
Problem 7.9  
Permanganate ion reacts with bromide 
ion in basic medium to give manganese 
dioxide and bromate ion. Write the 
balanced ionic equation for the reaction. 
Solution 
Step 1: The skeletal ionic equation is : 
MnO4
–(aq) + Br–(aq) → MnO2(s) + BrO3
– (aq)
Step 2: Assign oxidation numbers for 
Mn and Br
+7	
           –1	
    +4 	
          +5
MnO4
–(aq) + Br–(aq) →MnO2 (s) + BrO3
– (aq)
this indicates that permanganate ion 
is the oxidant and bromide ion is the 
reductant. 
Step 3: Calculate the increase and 
decrease of oxidation number, and make 
the increase equal to the decrease. 
  +7	
            –1	
      +4	
           +5	
 
2MnO4
–(aq)+Br –(aq) → 2MnO2(s)+BrO3
–(aq)
Step 4: As the reaction occurs in the 
basic medium, and the ionic charges are 
not equal on both sides, add 2 OH– ions 
on the right to make ionic charges equal. 
2MnO4
– (aq) + Br– (aq) → 2MnO2(s) + 
	
BrO3
–(aq) + 2OH–(aq)
Step 5: Finally, count the hydrogen atoms 
and add appropriate number of water 
molecules (i.e. one H2O molecule) on the 
left side to achieve balanced redox change. 
2MnO4
–(aq) + Br–(aq) + H2O(l) → 2MnO2(s) 
  	
	
        + BrO3
– (aq) + 2OH–(aq)
(b) Half Reaction Method: In this method, 
the two half equations are balanced separately 
and then added together to give balanced 
equation. 
Suppose we are to balance the equation 
showing the oxidation of Fe2+ ions to Fe3+ ions 
by dichromate ions (Cr2O7)2– in acidic medium, 
wherein, Cr2O7
2– ions are reduced to Cr3+ ions. 
The following steps are involved in this task. 
Step 1:	Produce unbalanced equation for the 
reaction in ionic form : 
Fe2+(aq) + Cr2O7
2– (aq) →  Fe3+ (aq) + Cr3+(aq)	
	
	
(7.50)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 14 :
 248
chemistry
Step 2:	Separate the equation into half-
reactions: 
	
	
	
+2	
         +3		
Oxidation half : Fe2+ (aq) →  Fe3+(aq)      (7.51)
	
	
	
+6 –2	
	
    +3
Reduction half : Cr2O7
2–(aq) →  Cr3+(aq)	
	
	
(7.52)
Step 3:	Balance the atoms other than O and 
H in each half reaction individually. Here the 
oxidation half reaction is already balanced 
with respect to Fe atoms. For the reduction 
half reaction, we multiply the Cr3+ by 2 to 
balance Cr atoms.
Cr2O7 
2–(aq)  →  2 Cr3+(aq)	
(7.53)
Step 4:	For reactions occurring in acidic 
medium, add H2O to balance O atoms and H+ 
to balance H atoms. 
Thus, we get :
Cr2O7 
2– (aq) + 14H+ (aq) → 2 Cr3+(aq) + 7H2O (l)
	
(7.54)
Step 5:	Add electrons to one side of the half 
reaction to balance the charges. If need be, 
make the number of electrons equal in the 
two half reactions by multiplying one or both 
half reactions by appropriate number. 
The oxidation half reaction is thus 
rewritten to balance the charge: 
Fe2+ (aq)  →  Fe3+ (aq)  + e–	
(7.55)
Now in the reduction half reaction there 
are net twelve positive charges on the left hand 
side and only six positive charges on the right 
hand side. Therefore, we add six electrons on 
the left side. 
Cr2O7 
2– (aq) + 14H+ (aq) + 6e– → 2Cr3+(aq) +
	
7H2O (l) (7.56)
To equalise the number of electrons in both 
the half reactions, we multiply the oxidation 
half reaction by 6 and write as : 
6Fe2+ (aq) → 6Fe3+(aq)  + 6e–		
      (7.57)
Step 6:	We add the two half reactions to 
achieve the overall reaction and cancel the 
electrons on each side. This gives the net ionic 
equation as : 
6Fe2+(aq) + Cr2O7
2–(aq) + 14H+(aq) → 6 Fe3+(aq) +
	
2Cr 3+(aq) + 7H2O(l)  (7.58)
Step 7: Verify that the equation contains the 
same type and number of atoms and the same 
charges on both sides of the equation. This 
last check reveals that the equation is fully 
balanced with respect to number of atoms 
and the charges. 
For the reaction in a basic medium, first 
balance the atoms as is done in acidic medium. 
Then for each H+ ion, add an equal number of 
OH– ions to both sides of the equation. Where 
H+ and OH– appear on the same side of the 
equation, combine these to give H2O. 
Problem 7.10
Permanganate(VII) ion, MnO4
– in basic 
solution oxidises iodide ion, I– to produce 
molecular iodine (I2) and manganese 
(IV) oxide (MnO2). Write a balanced ionic 
equation to represent this redox reaction. 
Solution
Step 1:	
First we write the skeletal 
ionic equation, which is 
MnO4
– (aq) + I– (aq) → MnO2(s) + I2(s)
Step 2: The two half-reactions are: 
	
	
         –1                 0
Oxidation half :  I–(aq)   →   I2 (s)
	
	
       +7		
         +4
Reduction half:  MnO4
–(aq) →  MnO2(s)
Step 3: To balance the I atoms in the 
oxidation half reaction, we  rewrite it as: 
	
	
2I– (aq) → I2 (s)
Step 4: To balance the O atoms in the 
reduction half reaction, we add two water 
molecules on the right: 
MnO4
– (aq) → MnO2 (s) + 2 H2O (l)
To balance the H atoms, we add four H+ 
ions on the left: 
MnO4 
– (aq) + 4 H+ (aq) → MnO2(s) + 2H2O (l)
As the reaction takes place in a basic 
solution, therefore, for four H+ ions, we 
add four OH– ions to both sides of the 
equation: 
MnO4
– (aq) + 4H+ (aq) + 4OH–(aq)  → 
	
MnO2 (s) + 2 H2O(l)  + 4OH– (aq)
Replacing the H+ and OH– ions with water, 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 15 :
 249
redox reactions
the resultant equation is: 
MnO4
– (aq) + 2H2O (l) → MnO2 (s) + 4 OH– (aq)
Step 5 : In this step we balance the 
charges of the two half-reactions in the 
manner depicted as: 
	
2I– (aq) → I2 (s) + 2e–
MnO4
–(aq) + 2H2O(l) + 3e– → MnO2(s) 
	
+ 4OH–(aq)
Now to equalise the number of electrons, 
we multiply the oxidation half-reaction by 
3 and the reduction half-reaction by 2. 
6I–(aq) → 3I2 (s) + 6e–
2 MnO4
– (aq) + 4H2O (l) +6e– → 2MnO2(s) 	
	
+ 8OH– (aq)
Step 6: Add two half-reactions to 
obtain the net reactions after cancelling 
electrons on both sides. 
6I–(aq) + 2MnO4
–(aq) + 4H2O(l) → 3I2(s) + 	
2MnO2(s) +8 OH–(aq)
Step 7: A final verification shows that 
the equation is balanced in respect of 
the number of atoms and charges on 
both sides. 
7.3.3	 Redox Reactions as the Basis  for 
Titrations 
In acid-base systems we come across with a 
titration method for finding out the strength 
of one solution against the other using a 
pH sensitive indicator. Similarly, in redox 
systems, the titration method can be adopted 
to determine the strength of a reductant/
oxidant using a redox sensitive indicator. 
The usage of indicators in redox titration is 
illustrated below:
(i)	 In one situation, the reagent itself is 
intensely coloured, e.g., permanganate 
ion, MnO4
–. Here MnO4
– acts as the self 
indicator. The visible end point in this case 
is achieved after the last of the reductant 
(Fe2+ or C2O4
2–) is oxidised and the first 
lasting tinge of pink colour appears at 
MnO4
– concentration as low as 10–6 mol dm–3 
(10–6 mol L–1). This ensures a minimal 
‘overshoot’ in colour beyond the equivalence 
point, the point where the reductant and 
the oxidant are equal in terms of their 
mole stoichiometry.
(ii)	 If there is no dramatic auto-colour change 
(as with MnO4
– titration), there are indicators 
which are oxidised immediately after the 
last bit of the reactant is consumed, 
producing a dramatic colour change. The 
best example is afforded by Cr2O7
2–, which 
is not a self-indicator, but oxidises the 
indicator substance diphenylamine just 
after the equivalence point to produce an 
intense blue colour, thus signalling the 
end point. 
(iii)	There is yet another method which is 
interesting and quite common. Its use is 
restricted to those reagents which are able 
to oxidise I– ions, say, for example, Cu(II): 
2Cu2+(aq) + 4I–(aq) → Cu2I2(s) + I2(aq)  (7.59)
This method relies on the facts that 
iodine itself gives an intense blue colour with 
starch and has a very specific reaction with 
thiosulphate ions (S2O3
2–), which too is a redox 
reaction: 
I2(aq) + 2 S2O3
2–(aq)→2I–(aq) + S4O6
2–(aq) (7.60)
I2, though insoluble in water, remains in 
solution containing KI as KI3.
On addition of starch after the liberation 
of iodine from the reaction of Cu2+ ions on 
iodide ions, an intense blue colour appears. 
This colour disappears as soon as the iodine 
is consumed by the thiosulphate ions. Thus, 
the end-point can easily be tracked and the 
rest is the stoichiometric calculation only. 
7.3.4	 Limitations of Concept of Oxidation 
Number 
As you have observed in the above discussion, 
the concept of redox processes has been 
evolving with time. This process of evolution 
is continuing. In fact, in recent past the 
oxidation process is visualised as a decrease 
in electron density and reduction process as 
an increase in electron density around the 
atom(s) involved in the reaction.
7.4	 Redox Reactions and Electrode 
Processes
The experiment corresponding to reaction 
(7.15), can also be observed if zinc rod is 
dipped in copper sulphate solution. The 
redox reaction takes place and during the 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 16 :
 250
chemistry
reaction, zinc is oxidised to zinc ions and 
copper ions are reduced to metallic copper 
due to direct transfer of electrons from zinc 
to copper ion. During this reaction heat is 
also evolved.  Now we modify the experiment 
in such a manner that for the same redox 
reaction transfer of electrons takes place 
indirectly. This necessitates the separation 
of zinc metal from copper sulphate solution.  
We take copper sulphate solution in a beaker 
and put a copper strip or rod in it. We also 
take zinc sulphate solution in another beaker 
and put a zinc rod or strip in it.  Now reaction 
takes place in either of the beakers and at the 
interface of the metal and its salt solution in 
each beaker both the reduced and oxidized 
forms of the same species are present.  These 
represent the species in the reduction and 
oxidation half reactions. A redox couple is 
defined as having together the oxidised and 
reduced forms of a substance taking part in 
an oxidation or reduction half reaction.
This is represented by separating the 
oxidised form from the reduced form by 
a vertical line or a slash representing an 
interface (e.g. solid/solution).  For example 
in this experiment the two redox couples 
are represented as Zn2+/Zn and Cu2+/Cu. 
In both cases, oxidised form is put before 
the reduced form. Now we put the beaker 
containing copper sulphate solution and  the 
beaker containing zinc sulphate solution 
side by side (Fig. 7.3). We connect solutions 
in two beakers by a salt bridge (a U-tube 
containing a solution of potassium chloride 
or ammonium nitrate usually solidified by 
boiling with agar agar and later cooling to a 
jelly like substance). This provides an electric 
contact between the two solutions without 
allowing them to mix with each other.  The 
zinc and copper rods are connected by a 
metallic wire with a provision for an ammeter 
and a switch. The set-up as shown in Fig.7.3 
is known as Daniell cell. When the switch is 
in the off position, no reaction takes place in 
either of the beakers and no current flows 
through the metallic wire.  As soon as the 
switch is in the on position, we make the 
following observations:
1.	 The transfer of electrons now does not 
take place directly from Zn to Cu2+ but 
through the metallic wire connecting the 
two rods as is apparent from the arrow 
which indicates the flow of current.  
2.	 The electricity from solution in one beaker 
to solution in the other beaker flows by 
the migration of ions through the salt 
bridge.  We know that the flow of current 
is possible only if there is a potential 
difference between the copper and zinc 
rods known as electrodes here.
The potential  associated with each 
electrode is known as electrode potential. 
If the concentration of each species taking 
part in the electrode reaction is unity (if any 
gas appears in the electrode reaction, it is 
confined to 1 atmospheric pressure) and 
further the reaction is carried out at 298K, 
then the potential of each electrode is said 
to be the Standard Electrode Potential. By 
convention, the standard electrode potential 
(E) of hydrogen electrode is 0.00 volts. The 
electrode potential value for each electrode 
process is a measure of the relative tendency 
of the active species in the process to remain 
in the oxidised/reduced form. A negative E 
means that the redox couple is a stronger 
Fig.7.3	 The set-up for Daniell cell. Electrons 
produced at the anode due to oxidation 
of Zn travel through the external circuit 
to the cathode where these reduce the 
copper ions. The circuit is completed 
inside the cell by the migration of ions 
through the salt bridge.  It may be noted 
that the direction of current is opposite to 
the direction of electron flow.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 17 :
 251
redox reactions
	
Reaction (Oxidised form + ne–      	  → Reduced form)	
E / V
F2(g) + 2e–  	
→ 2F–	
	
2.87
Co3+ + e– 	
→ Co2+	
	
1.81
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e– 	
→ 2H2O	
   	
1.78
MnO4
– + 8H+ + 5e– 	
→ Mn2+ + 4H2O	
	
1.51
Au3+ + 3e– 	
→ Au(s)	
	
1.40
Cl2(g) + 2e– 	
→ 2Cl–	
	
1.36
Cr2O7
2– + 14H+ + 6e– 	
→ 2Cr3+ + 7H2O	
	
1.33
O2(g) + 4H+ + 4e– 	
→ 2H2O	
	
1.23
MnO2(s) + 4H+ + 2e– 	
→ Mn2+ + 2H2O	
	
1.23
Br2 + 2e– 	
→ 2Br–	
	
1.09
NO3
– + 4H+ + 3e– 	
→ NO(g) + 2H2O	
	
0.97
2Hg2+ + 2e– 	
→ Hg2
2+	
	
0.92
Ag+ + e– 	
→ Ag(s)	
	
0.80
Fe3+ + e– 	
→ Fe2+	
	
0.77
O2(g) + 2H+ + 2e– 	
→ H2O2	
	
0.68
I2(s) + 2e– 	
→ 2I–	
	
0.54
Cu+ + e– 	
→ Cu(s)	
	
0.52
Cu2+ + 2e– 	
→ Cu(s)	
	
0.34
AgCl(s) + e– 	
→ Ag(s) + Cl–	
	
0.22
AgBr(s) + e– 	
→ Ag(s) + Br–	
	
0.10
2H+ + 2e– 	
→ H2(g)	
	
0.00
Pb2+ + 2e– 	
→ Pb(s)	
	
–0.13
Sn2+ + 2e– 	
→ Sn(s)	
	
–0.14
Ni2+ + 2e– 	
→ Ni(s)	
	
–0.25
Fe2+ + 2e– 	
→ Fe(s)	
	
–0.44
Cr3+ + 3e– 	
→ Cr(s)	
	
–0.74
Zn2+ + 2e– 	
→ Zn(s)	
	
–0.76
2H2O + 2e–	
→ H2(g) + 2OH–	
	
–0.83
Al3+ + 3e– 	
→ Al(s)	
	
–1.66
Mg2+ + 2e– 	
→ Mg(s)	
	
–2.36
Na+ + e– 	
→ Na(s)	
	
–2.71
Ca2+ + 2e– 	
→ Ca(s)	
	
–2.87
K+ + e– 	
→ K(s)	
	
–2.93
Li+ + e– 	
→ Li(s)	
	
–3.05
 Increasing strength of oxidising agent
 Increasing strength of reducing agent
1. 	 A negative E means that the redox couple is a stronger reducing agent than the H+/H2  couple.
2. 	 A positive E means that the redox couple is a weaker reducing agent than the H+/H2  couple. 
Table 7.1  The Standard Electrode Potentials at 298 K
Ions are present as aqueous species and H2O as liquid; gases and 
solids are shown by g and s respectively.
reducing agent than the H+/H2 couple. A 
positive E means that the redox couple is a 
weaker reducing agent than the H+/H2 couple. 
The standard electrode potentials are very 
important and we can get a lot of other useful  
information from them. The values of standard 
electrode potentials for some selected electrode 
processes (reduction reactions) are given in 
Table 7.1. You will learn more about electrode 
reactions and cells in Class XII. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 18 :
 252
chemistry
SUMMARY 
Redox reactions form an important class of reactions in which oxidation and reduction 
occur simultaneously. Three tier conceptualisation viz, classical, electronic and oxidation 
number, which is usually available in the texts, has been presented in detail. Oxidation, 
reduction, oxidising agent (oxidant) and reducing agent (reductant) have been viewed 
according to each conceptualisation. Oxidation numbers are assigned in accordance with a 
consistent set of rules. Oxidation number and ion-electron method both are useful means in 
writing equations for the redox reactions. Redox reactions are classified into four categories: 
combination, decomposition displacement and disproportionation reactions. The concept of 
redox couple and electrode processes is introduced here. The redox reactions find wide 
applications in the study of electrode processes and cells.
EXERCISES
7.1	
Assign oxidation number to the underlined elements in each of the following species: 
	
(a) NaH2PO4	
(b) NaHSO4	
(c)  H4P2O7	
(d)  K2MnO4
	
(e) CaO2	
(f)  NaBH4  	
(g)  H2S2O7	
(h)  KAl(SO4)2.12 H2O
7.2	
What are the oxidation number of the underlined elements in each of the following 
and how do you rationalise your results ? 
	
(a)  KI3	       (b)  H2S4O6	      (c)  Fe3O4      (d)  CH3CH2OH       (e)  CH3COOH
7.3	
Justify that the following reactions are redox reactions: 
	
(a)	 CuO(s) + H2(g) → Cu(s) + H2O(g)
	
(b)	 Fe2O3(s)  + 3CO(g) → 2Fe(s)  + 3CO2(g)
	
(c)	 4BCl3(g)  +  3LiAlH4(s)  → 2B2H6(g)  + 3LiCl(s) +  3 AlCl3 (s)
	
(d)	 2K(s)  +  F2(g)  →  2K+F– (s)
	
(e)	 4 NH3(g) + 5 O2(g) → 4NO(g) + 6H2O(g)
7.4	
Fluorine reacts with ice and results in the change: 
	
H2O(s) + F2(g)	 →  HF(g)  + HOF(g)
	
Justify that this reaction is a redox reaction. 
7.5	
Calculate the oxidation number of sulphur, chromium and nitrogen in H2SO5, Cr2O7
2– 
and NO3
–. Suggest structure of these compounds. Count for the fallacy. 
7.6	
Write formulas for the following compounds: 
	
(a)	 Mercury(II) chloride	
	
(b)  Nickel(II) sulphate
	
(c)	 Tin(IV) oxide	
	
	
(d)  Thallium(I) sulphate
	
(e)	 Iron(III) sulphate	 	
	
( f )  Chromium(III) oxide
7.7	
Suggest a list of the substances where carbon can exhibit oxidation states from –4 
to +4 and nitrogen from –3 to +5. 
7.8	
While sulphur dioxide and hydrogen peroxide can act as oxidising as well as reducing 
agents in their reactions, ozone and nitric acid act only as oxidants. Why ? 
7.9	
Consider the reactions: 
	
(a)	
6 CO2(g)  + 6H2O(l)  →  C6 H12 O6(aq)  + 6O2(g)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 19 :
 253
redox reactions
	
(b)  O3(g)  + H2O2(l)  → H2O(l) + 2O2(g)
	
Why it is more appropriate to write these reactions as : 
	
(a)	 6CO2(g) + 12H2O(l)  →  C6 H12 O6(aq)  + 6H2O(l) + 6O2(g)
	
(b)	 O3(g)  +  H2O2 (l)  →  H2O(l) + O2(g) + O2(g) 
	
Also suggest a technique to investigate the path of the above (a) and (b) redox 
reactions.
7.10	
The compound AgF2 is unstable compound. However, if formed, the compound acts 
as a very strong oxidising agent. Why ? 
7.11	
Whenever a reaction between an oxidising agent and a reducing agent is carried out, 
a compound of lower oxidation state is formed if the reducing agent is in excess and 
a compound of higher oxidation state is formed if the oxidising agent is in excess. 
Justify this statement giving three illustrations. 
7.12	
How do you count for the following observations ? 
	
(a)	Though alkaline potassium permanganate and acidic potassium permanganate 
both are used as oxidants, yet in the manufacture of benzoic acid from toluene 
we use alcoholic potassium permanganate as an oxidant. Why ? Write a balanced 
redox equation for the reaction. 
	
(b)	When concentrated sulphuric acid is added to an inorganic mixture containing 
chloride, we get colourless pungent smelling gas HCl, but if the mixture contains 
bromide then we get red vapour of bromine. Why ? 
7.13	
Identify the substance oxidised reduced, oxidising agent and reducing agent for 
each of the following reactions: 
	
(a)	 2AgBr (s) + C6H6O2(aq) → 2Ag(s) + 2HBr (aq) + C6H4O2(aq)
	
(b)	 HCHO(l) + 2[Ag (NH3)2]+(aq) + 3OH–(aq) → 2Ag(s) +  HCOO–(aq) + 4NH3(aq) 
	
+ 2H2O(l)
	
(c)	 HCHO (l) + 2 Cu2+(aq) + 5 OH–(aq) → Cu2O(s) + HCOO–(aq) + 3H2O(l) 
	
(d)	 N2H4(l) + 2H2O2(l) → N2(g) + 4H2O(l)
	
(e)	 Pb(s) + PbO2(s) + 2H2SO4(aq) → 2PbSO4(s) + 2H2O(l) 
7.14	
Consider the reactions : 
	
2 S2O3
2– (aq) + I2(s) → S4 O6 
2–(aq) +  2I–(aq)
	
S2O3 
2–(aq) + 2Br2(l) + 5 H2O(l) → 2SO4
2–(aq) + 4Br–(aq) + 10H+(aq) 
	
Why does the same reductant, thiosulphate react differently with iodine and  
bromine ? 
7.15	
Justify giving reactions that among halogens, fluorine is the best oxidant and among 
hydrohalic compounds, hydroiodic acid is the best reductant. 
7.16	
Why does the following reaction occur ? 
	
XeO6
4– (aq) + 2F
– (aq) + 6H+(aq) → XeO3(g)+ F2(g) + 3H2O(l)
	
What conclusion about the compound Na4XeO6 (of which XeO6
4– is a part) can be 
drawn from the reaction. 
7.17	
Consider the reactions: 
	
(a)	 H3PO2(aq) + 4 AgNO3(aq) + 2 H2O(l) → H3PO4(aq) + 4Ag(s) + 4HNO3(aq)
	
(b)	 H3PO2(aq) + 2CuSO4(aq) + 2 H2O(l)  → H3PO4(aq) + 2Cu(s) +  H2SO4(aq)
	
(c)	 C6H5CHO(l) + 2[Ag (NH3)2]+(aq) + 3OH–(aq) → C6H5COO–(aq) + 2Ag(s) + 
	
	
	
4NH3 (aq) + 2 H2O(l)
	
(d)	 C6H5CHO(l) + 2Cu2+(aq) + 5OH–(aq) → No change observed. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 20 :
 254
chemistry
	
What inference do you draw about the behaviour of Ag+ and Cu2+ from these  
reactions ? 
7.18	
Balance the following redox reactions by ion – electron method : 
	
(a)	 MnO4
– (aq) + I– (aq) →  MnO2 (s) + I2(s) (in basic medium)
	
(b)	 MnO4
– (aq) + SO2 (g) →  Mn2+ (aq) + HSO4
– (aq)  (in acidic solution)
	
(c)	 H2O2 (aq) + Fe2+ (aq) →  Fe3+ (aq) + H2O (l)  (in acidic solution)
	
(d)	 Cr2O7 
2– +  SO2(g) →  Cr3+ (aq) + SO4
2– (aq) (in acidic solution)
7.19	
Balance the following equations in basic medium by ion-electron method and 
oxidation number methods and identify the oxidising agent and the reducing agent. 
	
(a)	 P4(s) + OH–(aq)  →  PH3(g) + HPO2
– (aq) 
	
(b)	 N2H4(l) + ClO3 
–(aq) → NO(g) + Cl–(g)
	
(c)	 Cl2O7 (g) + H2O2(aq) →  ClO2
–(aq) + O2(g) + H+
7.20	
What sorts of informations can you draw from the following reaction ?
	
(CN)2(g) + 2OH–(aq) →  CN–(aq) + CNO–(aq) + H2O(l) 
7.21	
The Mn3+ ion is unstable in solution and undergoes disproportionation to give Mn2+, 
MnO2, and H+ ion. Write a balanced ionic equation for the reaction. 
7.22	
Consider the elements : 
	
Cs, Ne, I and F
	
(a)	 Identify the element that exhibits only negative oxidation state. 
	
(b)	 Identify the element that exhibits only postive oxidation state.
	
(c)	 Identify the element that exhibits both positive and negative oxidation states.
	
(d)	 Identify the element which exhibits neither the negative nor does the positive 
oxidation state. 
7.23	
Chlorine is used to purify drinking water. Excess of chlorine is harmful. The excess 
of chlorine is removed by treating with sulphur dioxide. Present a balanced equation 
for this redox change taking place in water. 
7.24	
Refer to the periodic table given in your book and now answer the following questions: 
	
(a)	 Select the possible non metals that can show disproportionation reaction.
	
(b)	 Select three metals that can show disproportionation reaction.
7.25	
In Ostwald’s process for the manufacture of nitric acid, the first step involves the 
oxidation of ammonia gas by oxygen gas to give nitric oxide gas and steam. What is 
the maximum weight of nitric oxide that can be obtained starting only with 10.00 
g. of ammonia and 20.00 g of oxygen ? 
7.26	
Using the standard electrode potentials given in the Table 8.1, predict if the reaction 
between the following is feasible:
	
(a)	Fe3+(aq) and I–(aq)
	
(b)	Ag+(aq) and Cu(s)
	
(c)	 Fe3+ (aq) and Cu(s)
	
(d)	Ag(s) and Fe3+(aq)
	
(e)	 Br2(aq) and Fe2+(aq).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 21 :
 255
redox reactions
7.27	
Predict the products of electrolysis in each of the following:
	
(i)	
An aqueous solution of AgNO3 with silver electrodes
	
(ii)	
An aqueous solution AgNO3 with platinum electrodes
	
(iii)	
A dilute solution of H2SO4 with platinum electrodes
	
(iv)	
An aqueous solution of CuCl2 with platinum electrodes.
7.28	
Arrange the following metals in the order in which they displace each other from 
the solution of their salts.
	
Al, Cu, Fe, Mg and Zn.
7.29	
Given the standard electrode potentials,
	
K+/K = –2.93V, Ag+/Ag = 0.80V,
	
Hg2+/Hg = 0.79V
	
Mg2+/Mg = –2.37V. Cr3+/Cr = –0.74V
	
arrange these metals in their increasing order of reducing power.
7.30	
Depict the galvanic cell in which the reaction Zn(s) + 2Ag+(aq) → Zn2+(aq) +2Ag(s) 
takes place, Further show:
	
(i)	
which of the electrode is negatively charged,
	
(ii)	
the carriers of the current in the cell, and
	
(iii)	
individual reaction at each electrode.
	
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 1 :
 256
chemistry
Organic Chemistry – Some Basic  
Principles and Techniques
After studying this unit, you will 
be able to 
•	
u n d e r s t a n d  r e a s o n s  f o r 
tetravalence of carbon and 
shapes of organic molecules; 
•	
write structures of organic 
molecules in various ways;
•	
classify the organic compounds; 
•	
name the compounds according 
to IUPAC system of nomenclature 
and also derive their structures 
from the given names;
•	
understand the concept of 
organic reaction mechanism;
•	
explain the influence of electronic 
displacements on structure and 
reactivity of organic compounds;
•	
recognise the types of organic 
reactions;
•	
lear n the techniques of 
p u r i f i c a t i o n  o f  o r g a n i c 
compounds;
•	
write the chemical reactions 
involved in the qualitative 
analysis of organic compounds;
•	
understand the principles 
involved in quantitative analysis 
of organic compounds.
In the previous unit you have learnt that the element 
carbon has the unique property called catenation due to 
which it forms covalent bonds with other carbon atoms. 
It also forms covalent bonds with atoms of other elements 
like hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorus 
and halogens. The resulting compounds are studied 
under a separate branch of chemistry called organic 
chemistry. This unit incorporates some basic principles 
and techniques of analysis required for understanding the 
formation and properties of organic compounds.
8.1 General Introduction
Organic compounds are vital for sustaining life on earth 
and include complex molecules like genetic information 
bearing deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and proteins that 
constitute essential compounds of our blood, muscles and 
skin. Organic compounds appear in materials like clothing, 
fuels, polymers, dyes and medicines. These are some of 
the important areas of application of these compounds.
Science of organic chemistry is about two hundred 
years old. Around the year 1780, chemists began to 
distinguish between organic compounds obtained from 
plants and animals and inorganic compounds prepared 
from mineral sources. Berzilius, a Swedish chemist 
proposed that a ‘vital force’ was responsible for the 
formation of organic compounds. However, this notion 
was rejected in 1828 when F. Wohler synthesised an 
organic compound, urea from an inorganic compound, 
ammonium cyanate.
NH4CNO	    
	
NH2CONH2
Ammonium cyanate          Urea
The pioneering synthesis of acetic acid by Kolbe 
(1845) and that of methane by Berthelot (1856) showed 
conclusively that organic compounds could be synthesised 
from inorganic sources in a laboratory.
Unit 8
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 2 :
 257
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
The development of electronic theory of 
covalent bonding ushered organic chemistry 
into its modern shape.
8.2	
TETRAVALENCE OF CARBON:  
SHAPES OF ORGANIC COMPOUNDS
8.2.1 The Shapes of Carbon Compounds  
The knowledge of fundamental concepts of 
molecular structure helps in understanding 
and predicting the properties of organic 
compounds. You have already learnt theories 
of valency and molecular structure in Unit 4. 
Also, you already know that tetravalence of 
carbon and the formation of covalent bonds 
by it are explained in terms of its electronic 
configuration and the hybridisation of s and p 
orbitals. It may be recalled that formation and 
the shapes of molecules like methane (CH4), 
ethene (C2H4), ethyne (C2H2) are explained 
in terms of the use of sp3, sp2 and sp hybrid 
orbitals by carbon atoms in the respective 
molecules. 
Hybridisation influences the bond length 
and bond enthalpy (strength) in compounds. 
The sp hybrid orbital contains more s 
character and hence it is closer to its nucleus 
and forms shorter and stronger bonds than 
the sp3 hybrid orbital. The sp2 hybrid orbital 
is intermediate in s character between sp 
and sp3 and, hence, the length and enthalpy 
of the bonds it forms, are also intermediate 
between them. The change in hybridisation 
affects the electronegativity of carbon. The 
greater the s character of the hybrid orbitals, 
the greater is the electronegativity. Thus, a 
carbon atom having an sp hybrid orbital with 
50% s character is more electronegative than 
that possessing  sp2 or sp3 hybridised orbitals. 
This relative electronegativity is reflected in 
several physical and chemical properties of 
the molecules concerned, about which you 
will learn in later units. 
8.2.2 	
Some Characteristic Features of π 
Bonds
In a π (pi) bond formation, parallel orientation 
of the two p orbitals on adjacent atoms is 
necessary for a proper sideways overlap. 
Thus, in H2C=CH2 molecule all the atoms 
must be in the same plane. The p orbitals are 
mutually parallel and both the p orbitals are 
perpendicular to the plane of the molecule. 
Rotation of one CH2 fragment with respect 
to other interferes with maximum overlap 
of p orbitals and, therefore, such rotation 
about carbon-carbon double bond (C=C) is 
restricted. The electron charge cloud of the π 
bond is located above and below the plane of 
bonding atoms. This results in the electrons 
being easily available to the attacking  
reagents. In general, π bonds provide the most 
reactive centres in the molecules containing 
multiple bonds.
Problem 8.1
How many σ and π bonds are present in 
each of the following molecules?
(a) HC≡CCH=CHCH3 (b) CH2=C=CHCH3 
Solution
(a) σC – C: 4; σC–H : 6; πC=C :1; π C≡C:2
(b) σC – C: 3; σC–H: 6; πC=C: 2.
Problem 8.2
What is the type of hybridisation of each 
carbon in the following compounds? 
(a) CH3Cl, (b) (CH3)2CO, (c) CH3CN, 
(d) HCONH2, (e) CH3CH=CHCN
Solution
(a) sp3, (b) sp3, sp2, (c) sp3, sp, (d) sp2, (e) 
sp3, sp2, sp2, sp
Problem 8.3
Write the state of  hybridisation of carbon 
in the following compounds and shapes 
of each of the molecules. 
(a) H2C=O, (b) CH3F, (c) HC≡N.
Solution
(a) sp2 hybridised carbon, trigonal planar; 
(b) sp3 hybridised carbon, tetrahedral; (c) 
sp hybridised carbon, linear.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 3 :
 258
chemistry
8.3 	
STRUCTURAL RepresenTATIONS 
OF organic COMPOUNDs 
8.3.1 	Complete, Condensed and Bond-line 
Structural Formulas
Structures of organic compounds are 
represented in several ways. The Lewis 
structure or dot structure, dash structure, 
condensed structure and bond line structural 
formulas are some of the specific types. The 
Lewis structures, however, can be simplified 
by representing the two-electron covalent 
bond by a dash (–). Such a structural formula 
focuses on the electrons involved in bond 
formation.  A single dash represents a single 
bond, double dash  is used for double bond 
and a triple dash represents triple bond. Lone-
pairs of electrons on heteroatoms (e.g., oxygen, 
nitrogen, sulphur, halogens etc.) may or may 
not be shown. Thus, ethane (C2H6), ethene 
(C2H4), ethyne (C2H2) and methanol (CH3OH) 
can be represented by the following structural 
formulas. Such structural representations are 
called complete structural formulas.
Similarly, CH3CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH2CH3 
can be further condensed to CH3(CH2)6CH3. 
For further simplification, organic chemists 
use another way of representing the 
structures, in which only lines are used. 
In this bond-line structural representation 
of organic compounds, carbon and 
hydrogen atoms are not shown and the 
lines representing carbon-carbon bonds are  
drawn in a zig-zag fashion. The only atoms 
specifically written are oxygen, chlorine, 
nitrogen etc. The terminals denote methyl  
(–CH3) groups (unless indicated otherwise by 
a functional group), while the line junctions 
denote carbon atoms bonded to appropriate 
number of hydrogens required to satisfy the 
valency of the carbon atoms. Some of the 
examples are represented as follows:
(i) 3-Methyloctane can be represented in 
various forms as:
(a)   CH3CH2CHCH2CH2CH2CH2CH3
                     |
                   CH3 
These structural formulas can be further 
abbreviated by omitting some or all of the 
dashes representing covalent bonds and by 
indicating the number of identical groups 
attached to an atom by a subscript. The 
resulting expression of the compound is 
called a condensed structural formula. Thus, 
ethane, ethene, ethyne and methanol can be 
written as:
CH3CH3        H2C=CH2       HC≡CH            CH3OH 
Ethane       Ethene         Ethyne      Methanol 
	
	
     Ethane                  Ethene               
   Ethyne              Methanol
(ii) Various ways of representing 2-bromo 
butane are:
(a)  CH3CHBrCH2CH3  (b)  
(c)  
(b)
(c)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 4 :
 259
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
In cyclic compounds, the bond-line formulas 
may be given as follows:
Cyclopropane
Cyclopentane
chlorocyclohexane
Problem 8.4
Expand each of the following condensed 
formulas into their complete structural 
formulas.
(a) CH3CH2COCH2CH3
(b) CH3CH=CH(CH2)3CH3
Solution
(a)	
(b)  
(b)	
Solution
Condensed formula:
(a) HO(CH2)3CH(CH3)CH(CH3)2
(b)	 HOCH(CN)2
Bond-line formula:
Problem 8.5
For each of the following compounds, 
write a  condensed formula and also their 
bond-line formula.
(a)	 HOCH2CH2CH2CH(CH3)CH(CH3)CH3
(b)
(a)
Problem 8.6
Expand each of the following bond-line 
formulas to show all the atoms including 
carbon and hydrogen
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Solution
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 5 :
 260
chemistry
 Framework model
 Ball and stick model
Space filling model
Fig. 8.2
8.3.2 	
Three-Dimensional 
Representation of Organic 
Molecules
The three-dimensional (3-D) structure of 
organic molecules can be represented on 
paper by using certain conventions. For 
example, by using solid (
) and dashed 
(
) wedge formula, the 3-D image of a 
molecule from a two-dimensional picture 
can be perceived. In these formulas the 
solid-wedge is used to indicate a bond 
projecting out of the plane of paper, towards 
the observer. The dashed-wedge is used to 
depict the bond projecting out of the plane of 
the paper and away from the observer. Wedges 
are shown in such a way that the broad end of 
the wedge is towards the observer. The bonds 
lying in plane of the paper are depicted by 
using a normal line (—). 3-D representation of 
methane molecule on paper has been shown 
in Fig. 8.1 
Fig. 8.1 Wedge-and-dash representation of CH4
Molecular Models
Molecular models are physical devices 
that are used for a better visualisation and 
perception of three-dimensional shapes 
of organic molecules. These are made of 
wood, plastic or metal and are commercially 
available. Commonly three types of molecular 
models are used: (1) Framework model, (2) 
Ball-and-stick model, and (3) Space filling 
model. In the framework model only the 
bonds connecting the atoms of a molecule 
and not the atoms themselves are shown. 
This model emphasizes the pattern of 
bonds of a molecule while ignoring the size 
of atoms. In the ball-and-stick model, both 
the atoms and the bonds are shown. Balls 
represent atoms and the stick denotes a 
bond. Compounds containing C=C (e.g., 
ethene) can best be represented by using 
springs in place of sticks. These models are 
referred to as ball-and-spring model. The 
space-filling model emphasises the relative 
size of each atom based on its van der Waals 
radius. Bonds are not shown in this model. 
It conveys the volume occupied by each atom 
in the molecule. In addition to these models, 
computer graphics can also be used for 
molecular modelling. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 6 :
 261
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
                	
       
8.4	
Classification of Organic 
Compounds
The existing large number of organic 
compounds and their ever -increasing 
numbers has made it necessary to classify 
them on the basis of their structures. Organic 
compounds are broadly classified as follows:
I.	Acyclic or open chain compounds
These compounds are also called as aliphatic 
compounds and consist of straight or 
branched chain compounds, for example:
(homocyclic).
Cyclohexane
Cyclohexene
Cyclopropane 
Sometimes atoms other than carbon are 
also present in the ring (heterocylic). 
Tetrahydrofuran given below is an example 
of this type of compound:
Tetrahydrofuran
These exhibit some of the properties similar 
to those of aliphatic compounds.
(b) Aromatic compounds
Aromatic compounds are special types of 
compounds. You will learn about these 
compounds in detail in Unit 9. These include 
benzene and other related ring compounds 
(benzenoid). Like alicyclic compounds, 
aromatic comounds may also have hetero 
atom in the ring. Such compounds are called 
hetrocyclic aromatic compounds. Some of 
the examples of various types of aromatic 
compounds are:
Benzenoid aromatic compounds
Benzene          Aniline            Naphthalene
Non-benzenoid compound
Tropone
Isobutane
Acetaldehyde
Acetic acid
CH3CH3
Ethane
II	 Cyclic or closed chain or ring 
compounds
(a) Alicyclic compounds 
Alicyclic (aliphatic cyclic) compounds contain 
carbon atoms joined in the form of a ring 	
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 7 :
 262
chemistry
Heterocyclic aromatic compounds
   Furan             Thiophene            Pyridine
Organic compounds can also be classified 
on the basis of functional groups, into families 
or homologous series. 
8.4.1 Functional Group
The functional group is an atom  or a group 
of atoms joined to the carbon chain which is 
responsible for the characteristic chemical 
properties of the organic compounds. The 
examples are hydroxyl group (–OH), aldehyde 
group (–CHO) and carboxylic acid group (–
COOH) etc.
8.4.2 Homologous Series
A group or a series of organic compounds each 
containing a characteristic functional group 
forms a homologous series and the members of 
the series are called homologues. The members 
of a homologous series can be represented by 
general molecular formula and the successive 
members differ from each other in molecular 
formula by a –Ch2 unit. There are a number 
of homologous series of organic compounds. 
Some of these are alkanes, alkenes, alkynes, 
haloalkanes, alkanols, alkanals, alkanones, 
alkanoic acids, amines etc.
	
It is also possible that a compound contains 
two or more identical or different functional 
groups. This gives rise to polyfunctional 
compounds.
8.5 	
NOMENCLATURE OF ORGANIC 
COMPOUNDS
Organic chemistry deals with millions of 
compounds. In order to clearly identify 
them, a systematic method of naming has 
been developed and is known as the IUPAC 
(International Union of Pure and Applied 
Chemistry) system of nomenclature. In this 
systematic nomenclature, the names are 
correlated with the structure such that the 
reader or listener can deduce the structure 
from the name. 
	
Before the IUPAC system of nomenclature, 
however, organic compounds were assigned 
names based on their origin or certain 
properties. For instance, citric acid is named 
so because it is found in citrus fruits and the 
acid found in red ant is named formic acid 
since the Latin word for ant is formica. These 
names are traditional and are considered 
as trivial or common names. Some common 
names are followed even today. For example, 
Buckminsterfullerene is a common name 
given to the newly discovered C60 cluster (a 
form of carbon) noting its structural similarity 
to the geodesic domes popularised by the 
famous architect R. Buckminster Fuller. 
Common names are useful and in many 
cases indispensable, particularly when the 
alternative systematic names are lengthy and 
complicated. Common names of some organic 
compounds are given in Table 8.1. 
Table 8.1	
Common or Trivial Names of Some 
Organic Compounds
8.5.1  The IUPAC System of Nomenclature
A systematic name of an organic compound 
is generally derived by identifying the parent 
hydrocarbon and the functional group(s) 
attached to it. See the example given below. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 8 :
 263
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
By further using prefixes and suffixes, the 
parent name can be modified to obtain the 
actual name. Compounds containing carbon 
and hydrogen only are called hydrocarbons. 
A hydrocarbon is termed saturated if it 
contains only carbon-carbon single bonds. 
The IUPAC name for a homologous series of 
such compounds is alkane. Paraffin (Latin: 
little affinity) was the earlier name given to 
these compounds. Unsaturated hydrocarbons 
are those, which contain at least one carbon-
carbon double or triple bond. 
8.5.2	
IUPAC Nomenclature of  Alkanes
Straight chain hydrocarbons: The names 
of such compounds are based on their chain 
structure, and end with suffix ‘-ane’ and carry 
a prefix indicating the number of carbon 
atoms present in the chain (except from CH4 
to C4H10, where the prefixes are derived from 
trivial names). The IUPAC names of some 
straight chain saturated hydrocarbons are 
given in Table 8.2. The alkanes in Table 
8.2 differ from each other by merely the 
number of -CH2 groups in the chain. They are 
homologues of alkane series.
In order to name such compounds, the names 
of alkyl groups are prefixed to the name of 
parent alkane. An alkyl group is derived 
from a saturated hydrocarbon by removing 
a hydrogen atom from carbon.  Thus, CH4 
becomes  -CH3 and is called methyl group. An 
alkyl group is named by substituting ‘yl’ for 
‘ane’ in the corresponding alkane. Some alkyl 
groups are listed in Table 8.3.
Table 8.3  Some Alkyl Groups
Table 8.2	
IUPAC Names of Some Unbranched 
Saturated Hydrocarbons
Branched chain hydrocarbons: In a 
branched chain compound small chains of 
carbon atoms are attached at one or more 
carbon atoms of the parent chain. The small 
carbon chains (branches) are called alkyl 
groups. For example:
CH3–CH–CH2–CH3  CH3–CH–CH2–CH–CH3
	 	
	
          	 	

CH3	
	
            CH2CH3   CH3
(a)
(b)
	
Abbreviations are used for some alkyl 
groups. For example, methyl is abbreviated as 
Me, ethyl as Et, propyl as Pr and butyl as Bu. 
The alkyl groups can be branched also. Thus, 
propyl and butyl groups can have branched 
structures as shown below. 
CH3-CH-	
CH3-CH2-CH-	     CH3-CH-CH2- 
	
                                                                  
CH3
CH3
CH3
Isopropyl-
sec-Butyl-
Isobutyl-
	
              
       CH3	
           CH3
CH3-C-           CH3-C-CH2-
	
              
CH3	
                    CH3
tert-Butyl-            Neopentyl-
	
Common branched groups have specific 
trivial names. For example, the propyl groups 
can either be n-propyl group or isopropyl 
group. The branched butyl groups are called 
sec-butyl, isobutyl and tert-butyl group. 
We also encounter the structural unit,  
–CH2C(CH3)3, which is called neopentyl group.
Nomenclature of branched chain alkanes:  
We encounter a number of branched chain 
alkanes. The rules for naming them are given 
below.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 9 :
 264
chemistry
separated from the groups by hyphens 
and there is no break between methyl  
and nonane.] 
4.	 If two or more identical substituent 
groups are present then the numbers 
are separated by commas. The names of 
identical substituents are not repeated, 
instead prefixes such as di (for 2), tri  
(for 3), tetra (for 4), penta (for 5), hexa (for 
6) etc. are used. While writing the name 
of the substituents in alphabetical order, 
these prefixes, however, are not considered. 
Thus, the following compounds are  
named as: 
	
CH3	
CH3	
CH3	
CH3
	
	
	
 	
 
CH3-CH-CH2-CH-CH3	 CH3 C CH2CH CH3
 1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5
2,4-Dimethylpentane	
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
	
	
H3C H2C	
CH3
	
	
	
	
	
	

	
	
CH3CH2CHCCH2CH2CH3
	
	
1	
2	
3	
4	 5	
6	
7
	
	
	
	
	
CH3
 3-Ethyl-4,4-dimethylheptane 
5.	 If the two substituents are found in 
equivalent positions, the lower number 
is given to the one coming first in the 
alphabetical listing. Thus, the following 
compound is 3-ethyl-6-methyloctane and 
not 6-ethyl-3-methyloctane.
	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8
CH3 — CH2—CH—CH2—CH2—CH—CH2 —CH3 
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
CH2CH3	
	
CH3	
6.	 The branched alkyl groups can be 
named by following the above mentioned 
procedures. However, the carbon atom 
of the branch that attaches to the root 
alkane is numbered 1 as exemplified 
below. 
4	
3	
2	
1	
CH3–CH–CH2–CH–  
	
	
	

	
 CH3	CH3	
	
1,3-Dimethylbutyl-
1.	 First of all, the longest carbon chain in 
the molecule is identified. In the example  
(I) given below, the longest chain has nine 
carbons and it is considered as the parent 
or root chain. Selection of parent chain as 
shown in (II) is not correct because it has 
only eight carbons.
2.	 The carbon atoms of the parent chain are 
numbered to identify the parent alkane 
and to locate the positions of the carbon 
atoms at which branching takes place due 
to the substitution of alkyl group in place 
of hydrogen atoms. The numbering is 
done in such a way that the branched 
carbon atoms get the lowest possible 
numbers. Thus, the numbering in the 
above example should be from left to right 
(branching at carbon atoms 2 and 6) and 
not from right to left (giving numbers 
4 and  8 to the carbon atoms at which 
branches are attached). 
	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	
7	
8	
9
C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
	
	
	
	
	

	
C	
	
	
	
CC
9	
8	
7	
6	
5	
4	
3	
2	
1
C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
	
	 	
	

	
C	 	
	
C  C	
3.	 The names of  alkyl groups attached 
as a branch are then prefixed to the 
name of the parent alkane and position 
of the substituents is indicated by the 
appropriate numbers. If different alkyl 
groups are present, they are listed in 
alphabetical order. Thus, name for the 
compound shown above is: 6-ethyl-2-
methylnonane. [Note: the numbers are 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 10 :
 265
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
The name of such branched chain alkyl group 
is placed in parenthesis while naming the 
compound. While writing the trivial names 
of substituents’ in alphabetical order, the 
prefixes iso- and neo- are considered to be 
the part of the fundamental name of alkyl 
group. The prefixes sec- and tert- are not 
considered to be the part of the fundamental 
name. The use of iso and related common 
prefixes for naming alkyl groups is also 
allowed by the IUPAC nomenclature as long 
as these are not further substituted. In multi-
substituted compounds, the following rules 
may aso be remembered:
• 
If there happens to be two chains of equal 
size, then that chain is to be selected which 
contains more number of side chains.
• 
After selection of the chain, numbering 
is to be done from the end closer to the 
substituent.
5-(2,2-Dimethylpropyl)nonane 
    Problem 8.7
Structures and IUPAC names of some 
hydrocarbons are given below. Explain 
why the names given in the parentheses 
are incorrect.
3-Ethyl-1,1-dimethylcyclohexane                 
(not 1-ethyl-3,3-dimethylcyclohexane)
Cyclic Compounds: A saturated monocyclic 
compound is named by prefixing ‘cyclo’ to the 
corresponding straight chain alkane. If side 
chains are present, then the rules given above 
are applied. Names of some cyclic compounds 
are given below. 
5-sec-Butyl-4-isopropyldecane
Solution
(a) Lowest locant number, 2,5,6 is 
lower than 3,5,7, (b) substituents are 
in equivalent position; lower number is 
given to the one that comes first in the 
name according to alphabetical order.
2,5,6- Trimethyloctane 
[and not 3,4,7-Trimethyloctane] 
3-Ethyl-5-methylheptane 
[and not 5-Ethyl-3-methylheptane]
8.5.3	
N o m e n c l a t u r e  o f  O r g a n i c 
Compounds having Functional 
Group(s)
A functional group, as defined earlier, is an 
atom or a group of atoms bonded together in 
a unique manner which is usually the site of 
5-(2-Ethylbutyl)-3,3-dimethyldecane 
	
[and not 5-(2,2-Dimethylbutyl)-3-ethyldecane]       
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 11 :
 266
chemistry
chemical reactivity in an organic molecule.  
Compounds having the same functional 
group undergo similar reactions. For example, 
CH3OH, CH3CH2OH, and (CH3)2CHOH — 
all having -OH functional group liberate 
hydrogen on reaction with sodium metal. 
The presence of functional groups enables 
systematisation of organic compounds into 
different classes. Examples of some functional 
groups with their prefixes and suffixes along 
with some examples of organic compounds 
possessing these are given in Table 8.4.
First of all, the functional group present 
in the molecule is identified which determines 
the choice of appropriate suffix. The longest 
chain of carbon atoms containing the 
functional group is numbered in such a way 
that the functional group is attached at the 
carbon atom possessing lowest possible 
number in the chain. By using the suffix as 
given in Table 8.4, the name of the compound 
is arrived at. 
In the case of polyfunctional compounds, 
one of the functional groups is chosen as the 
principal functional group and the compound 
is then named on that basis. The remaining 
functional groups, which are subordinate 
functional groups, are named as substituents 
using the appropriate prefixes. The choice of 
principal functional group is made on the basis 
of order of preference. The order of decreasing 
priority for some functional groups is: 
-COOH, –SO3H, -COOR (R=alkyl group), COCl,  
-CONH2, -CN,-HC=O,  >C=O, -OH, -NH2, > 
C=C<,  -C≡C- . 
The –R, C6H5-, halogens (F, Cl, Br, I), –NO2, 
alkoxy (–OR) etc. are always prefix 
substituents. Thus, a compound containing 
both an alcohol and a keto group is named 
as hydroxyalkanone since the keto group is 
preferred to the hydroxyl group. 
For example, HOCH2(CH2)3CH2COCH3 will 
be named as 7-hydroxyheptan-2-one and not 
as 2-oxoheptan -7-ol. Similarly, BrCH2CH=CH2 
is named as 3-bromoprop-1-ene and not 
1-bromoprop-2-ene. 
	
If more than one functional group of the 
same type are present, their number is 
indicated by adding di, tri, etc. before the 
class suffix. In such cases the full name of the 
parent alkane is written before the class suffix. 
For example CH2(OH)CH2(OH) is named as  
ethane–1,2–diol. However, the ending – ne of 
the parent alkane is dropped  in the case of 
compounds having more than  one  double or 
triple bond; for example, CH2=CH-CH=CH2 is 
named as buta–1,3–diene.
Problem 8.8
Write the IUPAC names of the compounds  
i-iv from their given structures.
Solution 
•	
The functional group present is an 
alcohol (OH). Hence the suffix is ‘-ol’.
•	
The longest chain containing -OH 
has eight carbon atoms. Hence the  
corresponding saturated hydrocar-
bon is octane.
•	
The -OH is on carbon atom 3. In  
addition, a methyl group is attached 
at 6th carbon.
 	
Hence, the systematic name of this 
compound is 6-Methyloctan-3-ol.
Solution
The functional group present is ketone 
(>C=O), hence suffix ‘-one’. Presence 
of two keto groups is indicated by ‘di’, 
hence suffix becomes ‘dione’. The two 
keto groups are at carbons 2 and 4. 
The longest chain contains 6 carbon 
atoms, hence, parent hydrocarbon is 
hexane. Thus, the systematic name is 
Hexane-2,4-dione.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 12 :
 267
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
Table 8.4  Some Functional Groups and Classes of Organic Compounds
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 13 :
 268
chemistry
Solution
Here, two functional groups namely 
ketone and carboxylic acid are present. 
The principal functional group is the 
carboxylic acid group; hence the parent 
chain will be suffixed with ‘oic’ acid. 
Numbering of the chain starts from 
carbon of – COOH functional group. 
The keto group in the chain at carbon 
5 is indicated by ‘oxo’. The longest 
chain including the principal functional  
group has 6 carbon atoms; hence the 
parent hydrocarbon is hexane. The 
compound is, therefore, named as  
5-Oxohexanoic acid.
Solution
The two C=C functional groups are 
present at carbon atoms 1 and 3, while 
the C≡C functional group is present at 
carbon 5. These groups are indicated by 
suffixes ‘diene’ and ‘yne’ respectively. The 
longest chain containing the functional 
groups has 6 carbon atoms; hence the 
parent hydrocarbon is hexane. The name 
of compound, therefore, is Hexa-1,3-
dien-5-yne.
Problem 8.9
Derive the structure of (i) 2-Chlorohexane, 
(ii) Pent-4-en-2-ol, (iii) 3- Nitrocyclohexene, 
(iv) Cyclohex-2-en-1-ol, (v) 6-Hydroxy-
heptanal.
Solution
(i) ‘hexane’ indicates the presence of  
6 carbon atoms in the chain. The 
functional group chloro is present at 
carbon 2. Hence, the structure of the 
compound is CH3CH2CH2CH2CH(Cl)CH3.
(ii) ‘pent’ indicates that parent 
hydrocarbon contains 5 carbon atoms 
in the chain. ‘en’ and ‘ol’ correspond to 
the functional groups C=C and -OH at 
carbon atoms 4 and 2 respectively. Thus, 
the structure is 
CH2=CHCH2CH (OH)CH3.
(iii) Six membered ring containing a 
carbon-carbon double bond is implied 
by cyclohexene, which is numbered as 
shown in (I). The prefix 3-nitro means 
that a nitro group is present on C-3. 
Thus, complete structural formula of the 
compound is (II). Double bond is suffixed 
functional group whereas NO2 is prefixed 
functional group therefore double bond 
gets preference over –NO2 group:
(iv) ‘1-ol’ means that a -OH group is 
present at C-1. OH is suffixed functional 
group and gets preference over C=C 
bond. Thus the structure is as shown  
in (II):
(v) ‘heptanal’ indicates the compound 
to be an aldehyde containing 7 carbon 
atoms in the parent chain. The  
‘6-hydroxy’ indicates that -OH group is 
present at carbon 6. Thus, the structural 
formula of the compound is: CH3CH(OH)
CH2CH2CH2CH2CHO. Carbon atom of –
CHO group is included while numbering 
the carbon chain.
8.5.4	
Nomenclature of Substituted 
Benzene Compounds
For IUPAC nomenclature of substituted 
benzene compounds, the substituent is 
placed as prefix to the word benzene as shown 
in the following examples. However, common 
names (written in bracket below) of many 
substituted benzene compounds are also 
universally used. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 14 :
 269
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
If benzene ring is disubstituted, 
the position of substituents is defined 
by numbering the carbon atoms of the 
ring such that the substituents are 
located at the lowest numbers possible.
For example, the compound(b) is named 
as 1,3-dibromobenzene and not as 
1,5-dibromobenzene.
	
Substituent of the base compound is 
assigned number1 and then the direction 
of numbering is chosen such that the 
next substituent gets the lowest number. 
The substituents appear in the name in 
alphabetical order. Some examples are given 
below.
Methylbenzene      Methoxybenzene     Aminobenzene
    (Toluene)              (Anisole)    	            (Aniline)
      Nitrobenzene                  Bromobenzene
1,2-Dibromo- 
benzene
1,3-Dibromo- 
benzene
1,4-Dibromo- 
benzene
(a)
(b)
(c)
	
In the trivial system of nomenclature 
the terms ortho (o), meta (m) and para (p) 
are used as prefixes to indicate the relative 
positions 1,2;1,3 and 1,4 respectively. Thus, 
1,3-dibromobenzene (b) is named as  
m-dibromobenzene (meta is abbreviated as 
m-) and the other isomers of dibromobenzene 
1,2-(a) and 1,4-(c), are named as ortho (or 
just o-) and para (or just p-)-dibromobenzene, 
respectively. 
	
For tri - or higher substituted benzene 
derivatives, these prefixes cannot be used 
and the compounds are named by identifying 
substituent positions on the ring by following 
the lowest locant rule. In some cases, common 
name of benzene derivatives is taken as  the 
base compound.
1-Chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene 
(not 4-chloro,1,3-dinitrobenzene)               	
2-Chloro-1-methyl-4-nitrobenzene 
(not 4-methyl-5-chloro-nitrobenzene)    
2-Chloro-4-methylanisole
4-Ethyl-2-methylaniline 
3,4-Dimethylphenol
	
When a benzene ring is attached to an 
alkane with a functional group, it is considered 
as substituent, instead of a parent. The name 
for benzene as substituent is phenyl (C6H5-, 
also abbreviated as Ph).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 15 :
 270
chemistry
different carbon skeletons, these are referred 
to as chain isomers and the phenomenon is 
termed as chain isomerism. For example, 
C5H12
 represents three compounds:
Isomerism
Structural isomerism
Stereoisomerism
Chain
isomerism
Position
isomerism
Functional
group
isomerism
Metamerism
Geometrical
isomerism
Optical
isomerism
8.6 ISOMERISM
The phenomenon of existence of two or more 
compounds possessing the same molecular 
formula but different properties is known 
as isomerism. Such compounds are called 
as isomers. The following flow chart shows 
different types of isomerism. 
8.6.1 Structural Isomerism
Compounds having the same molecular 
formula but different structures (manners 
in which atoms are linked) are classified as 
structural isomers. Some typical examples 
of different types of structural isomerism are 
given below: 
(i) Chain isomerism: When two or more 
compounds have similar molecular formula but 
(a) 
(b)
(c)
(d)
Problem 8.10
Write the structural formula of:
(a)  o-Ethylanisole, (b) p-Nitroaniline, 
(c)  2,3 - Dibromo -1 - phenylpentane,
(d)  4-Ethyl-1-fluoro-2-nitrobenzene.
Solution
	
                        CH3
	
                
CH3 C CH3
                     	
                 CH3
 Neopentane
(2,2-Dimethylpropane)
(ii) Position isomerism: When two or 
more compounds differ in the position of 
substituent atom or functional group on 
the carbon skeleton, they are called position 
isomers and this phenomenon is termed 
as position isomerism. For example, the 
molecular formula C3H8O represents two 
alcohols:
(iii) Functional group isomerism: Two or 
more compounds having the same molecular 
formula but different functional groups 
are called functional isomers and this 
phenomenon is termed as functional group 
isomerism. For example, the molecular 
formula C3H6O represents an aldehyde and 
a ketone:
	
	
CH3
	
	

CH3CH2CH2CH2CH3	
CH3−CHCH2CH3    
	
Pentane	
Isopentane
	
	
 (2-Methylbutane) 
	
OH
	

	
CH3CH2CH2OH	
CH3−CH-CH3
	
Propan-1-ol	
	
Propan-2-ol
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 16 :
 271
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
(iv)	Metamerism: It arises due to different 
alkyl chains on either side of the functional 
group in the molecule. For example, C4H10O 
represents methoxypropane (CH3OC3H7) and 
ethoxyethane (C2H5OC2H5).
8.6.2 Stereoisomerism
The compounds that have the same 
constitution and sequence of covalent bonds 
but differ in relative positions of their atoms 
or groups in space are called stereoisomers. 
This special type of isomerism is called as 
stereoisomerism and can be classified as 
geometrical and optical isomerism. 
8.7	
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS IN 
ORGANIC REACTION MECHANISM
In an organic reaction, the organic molecule 
(also referred as a substrate) reacts with an 
appropriate attacking reagent and leads to 
the formation of one or more intermediate(s) 
and finally product(s)
The general reaction is depicted as follows : 
in understanding the reactivity of organic 
compounds and in planning strategy for their 
synthesis. 
In the following sections, we shall learn 
some of the principles that explain how these 
reactions take place. 
8.7.1 Fission of a Covalent Bond
A covalent bond can get cleaved either by : (i) 
heterolytic cleavage, or by (ii) homolytic 
cleavage. 
	
In heterolytic cleavage, the bond breaks 
in such a fashion that the shared pair of 
electrons remains with  one of the fragments. 
After heterolysis, one atom has a sextet 
electronic structure and a positive charge and 
the other, a valence octet with at least one lone 
pair and a negative charge. Thus, heterolytic 
cleavage of bromomethane will give C
+ H3 and 
Br– as shown below.
	
A species having a carbon atom possessing  
sextext of electrons and a positive charge is 
called a carbocation (earlier called carbonium 
ion). The 
H3 ion is known as a methyl cation 
or methyl carbonium ion. Carbocations are 
classified as primary, secondary or tertiary 
depending on  whether one, two or three 
carbons are directly attached to the positively 
charged carbon. Some other examples of 
carbocations are: CH3C
+ H2
 (ethyl cation, a 
primary carbocation), (CH3)2C
+ H (isopropyl 
cation, a secondary carbocation), and (CH3)3C
+ 
(tert-butyl cation, a tertiary carbocation). 
Carbocations are highly unstable and 
reactive species. Alkyl groups directly 
attached to the positively charged carbon 
stabilise the carbocations due to inductive 
and hyperconjugation effects, which you will 
be studying in the sections 8.7.5 and 8.7.9. 
The observed order of carbocation stability 
is: C
+ H3 < CH3C
+
H2 < (CH3)2C
+
H < (CH3)3C
+
. These 
carbocations have trigonal planar shape 
with positively charged carbon being sp2 
hybridised. Thus, the shape of C
+ H3 may be 
considered as being derived from the overlap 
of three equivalent C(sp2) hybridised orbitals 
with 1s orbital of each of the three hydrogen 
Organic
molecule
(Substrate)
[Intermediate]
Product(s)
Attacking 
Reagent
Byproducts
Substrate is that reactant which supplies 
carbon to the new bond and the other reactant 
is called reagent. If both the reactants 
supply carbon to the new bond then choice 
is arbitrary and in that case the molecule on 
which attention is focused is called substrate.
In such a reaction a covalent bond  
between two carbon atoms or a carbon and 
some other atom is broken and a new bond is 
formed. A sequential account of each step, 
describing details of electron movement, 
energetics during bond cleavage and bond 
formation, and the rates of transformation 
of reactants into products (kinetics) is 
referred to as reaction mechanism. The 
knowledge of reaction mechanism helps 
	
	
O	 	
	
	
H
	
	
 
 
 

	 CH3−C-CH3	
CH3−CH2—C= O
	
Propanone  
Propanal
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 17 :
 272
chemistry
atoms. Each bond may be represented as 
C(sp2)–H(1s) sigma bond. The remaining 
carbon orbital is perpendicular to the 
molecular plane and contains no electrons. 
[Fig. 8.3(a)]. 
Fig. 8.3 (a)  Shape of methyl carbocation
The heterolytic cleavage can also give a 
species in which carbon gets the shared 
pair of electrons. For example, when group 
Z attached to  the carbon leaves without 
electron pair, the methyl anion 
 is 
formed. Such a carbon species carrying a 
negative charge on carbon atom is called 
carbanion.  Carbon in carbanion is generally 
sp3 hybridised and its structure is distorted 
tetrahedron as shown in Fig. 8.3(b). 
Fig. 8.3 (b)  Shape of methyl carbanion
Carbanions are also unstable and reactive 
species. The organic reactions which proceed 
through heterolytic bond cleavage are called 
ionic or heteropolar or just polar reactions.
	
In homolytic cleavage, one of the electrons 
of the shared pair in a covalent bond goes 
with each of the bonded atoms. Thus, in 
homolytic cleavage, the movement of a 
single electron takes place instead of an 
electron pair. The single electron movement 
is shown by ‘half-headed’ (fish hook:
) 
curved arrow. Such cleavage results in 
the formation of neutral species (atom or 
group) which contains an unpaired electron. 
These species are called free radicals. Like 
carbocations and carbanions, free radicals are 
also very reactive. A homolytic cleavage can be  
shown as:
	
	
	
	
   Alkyl 
	
	
	
	
   free radical
Alkyl radicals are classified as primary, 
secondary, or tertiary. Alkyl radical stability 
increases as we proceed from primary to 
tertiary:
  
, 
	
Methyl	
Ethyl	
Isopropyl	
Tert-butyl
	
free 	
free 	
free	
free
	
radical	 radical	
radical	
radical
Organic reactions, which proceed by 
homolytic fission are called free radical or 
homopolar or nonpolar reactions. 
8.7.2 Substrate and Reagent 
Ions are generally not formed in the reactions 
of organic compounds. Molecules as such 
participate in the reaction. It is convenient to 
name one reagent as substrate and other as 
reagent. In general, a molecule whose carbon 
is involved in new bond formation is called 
substrate and the other one is called reagent. 
When carbon-carbon bond is formed, the 
choice of naming the reactants as substrate 
and reagent is arbitrary and depends on 
molecule under observation. Example:
(i) 	CH2 = CH2  +  Br2	 →	
CH2 Br – CH2Br
	
Substrate	
  Reagent	
Product
(ii) 	
Nucleophiles and Electrophiles
Reagents attack the reactive site of the 
substrate. The reactive site may be electron 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 18 :
 273
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
deficient portion of the molecule (a positive 
reactive site) e.g., an atom with incomplete 
electron shell or the positive end of the dipole 
in the molecule. If the attacking species is 
electron rich, it attacks these sites. If attacking 
species is electron deficient, the reactive site 
for it is that part of the substrate molecule 
which can supply electrons, e.g., π electrons 
in a double bond.
A reagent that brings an electron pair to 
the reactive site is called a nucleophile (Nu:) 
i.e., nucleus seeking and the reaction is then 
called nucleophilic. A reagent that takes away 
an electron pair from reactive site is called 
electrophile (E+) i.e., electron seeking and the 
reaction is called electrophilic. 
During a polar organic reaction, a 
nucleophile attacks an electrophilic centre 
of the substrate which is that specific atom 
or part of the substrate which is electron 
deficient. Similarly, the electrophiles attack 
at  nucleophilic centre, which is the electron  
rich centre of the substrate. Thus, the 
electrophiles receive electron pair from the 
substrate when the two undergo bonding 
interaction. A curved-arrow notation is used 
to show the movement of an electron pair 
from the nucleophile to the electrophile. Some 
examples of nucleophiles are the negatively 
charged ions with lone pair of electrons  such 
as hydroxide (HO– ), cyanide (NC–) ions and 
carbanions (R3C:–). Neutral molecules such 
as 
 etc., can also act as 
nucleophiles due to the presence of lone 
pair of electrons. Examples of electrophiles  
include carbocations (C
+ H3) and neutral 
molecules having functional groups like 
carbonyl group (>C=O) or alkyl halides  
(R3C-X, where X is a halogen atom). The  
carbon atom in carbocations has sextet 
configuration; hence, it is electron deficient  
and can receive a pair of electrons from the 
nucleophiles. In neutral molecules such as 
alkyl halides, due to the polarity of the C-X 
bond a partial positive charge is generated  
on the carbon atom and hence the carbon 
atom becomes an electrophilic centre at which 
a nucleophile can attack.
Problem 8.11
Using curved-arrow notation, show the 
formation of reactive  intermediates when 
the following covalent bonds undergo 
heterolytic cleavage. 
(a) CH3–SCH3, (b) CH3–CN, (c) CH3–Cu
Solution 
Problem 8.12
Giving justification, categorise the 
following molecules/ions as nucleophile 
or electrophile:
Solution
Nucleophiles: HS–,C2H5O–,(CH3)3N:H2N:– 
These species have unshared pair of 
electrons, which can be donated and 
shared with an electrophile.
Electrophiles: BF3,C1
+ H3–C
+ =O,N
+ 
O2. 
Reactive sites have only six valence 
electrons; can accept electron pair from 
a nucleophile.
Problem 8.13 
Identify electrophilic centre in the 
following: CH3CH=O, CH3CN, CH3I.
Solution
Among CH 3HC*=O, H 3CC*≡N, and  
H3C*–I, the starred carbon atoms are 
electrophilic centers as they will have 
partial positive charge due to polarity of 
the bond. 
8.7.3	
Electron Movement in Organic 
Reactions
The movement of electrons in organic 
reactions can be shown by curved-arrow 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 19 :
 274
chemistry
notation. It shows how changes in bonding 
occur due to electronic redistribution during 
the reaction. To show the change in position 
of a pair of electrons, curved arrow starts 
from the point from where an electron pair is 
shifted and it ends at a location to which the 
pair of electron may move. 
Presentation of shifting of electron pair is 
given below : 
(i) 
 	from π bond to 	
	
	
	
	
adjacent bond position
(ii) 
	from π bond to 	
	
	
	
	
adjacent atom
(iii) 
 from atom to adjacent 	
	
	
	
 bond 	position
Movement of single electron is indicated by 
a single barbed ‘fish hooks’ (i.e. half headed 
curved arrow). For example, in transfer of 
hydroxide ion giving ethanol and in the 
dissociation of chloromethane, the movement 
of electron using curved arrows can be 
depicted as follows: 
8.7.4	
Electron Displacement Effects in 
Covalent Bonds 
The electron displacement in an organic 
molecule may take place either in the ground 
state under the influence of an atom or a 
substituent group or in the presence of an 
appropriate attacking reagent. The electron 
displacements due to the influence of  
an atom or a substituent group present in 
the molecule cause permanent polarlisation 
of the bond. Inductive effect and resonance 
effects are examples of this type of electron 
displacements. Temporary electron 
displacement effects are seen in a molecule 
when a reagent approaches to attack it. 
This type of electron displacement is called 
electromeric effect or polarisability effect. 
In the following sections we will learn about 
these types of electronic displacements.
8.7.5	
Inductive Effect
When a covalent bond is formed between 
atoms of different electronegativity, the 
electron density is more towards the more 
electronegative atom of the bond. Such a shift 
of electron density results in a polar covalent 
bond. Bond polarity leads to various electronic 
effects in organic compounds. 
Let us consider cholorethane (CH3CH2Cl) 
in which the C–Cl bond is a polar covalent 
bond. It is polarised in such a way that the 
carbon-1 gains some positive charge (δ+) 
and the chlorine some negative charge (δ–). 
The fractional electronic charges on the two 
atoms in a polar covalent bond are denoted 
by symbol δ (delta) and the shift of electron 
density is shown by an arrow that points from 
δ+ to δ– end of the polar bond.
δδ+	
δ+	
δ−
CH3→CH2→Cl
2	
1
	
In turn carbon-1, which has developed 
partial positive charge (δ+) draws some 
electron density towards it from the adjacent 
C-C bond. Consequently, some positive charge 
(δδ+) develops on carbon-2 also, where δδ+ 
symbolises relatively smaller positive charge 
as compared to that on carbon – 1. In other 
words, the polar C – Cl bond induces polarity 
in the adjacent bonds. Such polarisation of  
σ-bond caused by the polarisation of adjacent 
σ-bond is referred to as the inductive effect. 
This effect is passed on to the subsequent 
bonds also but the effect decreases rapidly 
as the number of intervening bonds increases 
and becomes vanishingly small after three 
bonds. The inductive effect is related to the 
ability of substituent(s) to either withdraw or 
donate electron density to the attached carbon 
atom. Based on this ability, the substitutents 
can be classified as electron-withdrawing or 
electron donating groups relative to hydrogen. 
Halogens and many other groups such as 
nitro (- NO2), cyano  (- CN), carboxy (- COOH), 
ester (COOR), aryloxy (-OAr, e.g. – OC6H5), etc. 
are electron-withdrawing groups. On the other 
hand, the alkyl groups like methyl (–CH3) and 
ethyl (–CH2–CH3) are usually considered as 
electron donating groups.
­
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 20 :
 275
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
Problem 8.14
Which bond is more polar in the following 
pairs of molecules: (a) H3C-H, H3C-Br 
(b) H3C-NH2, H3C-OH (c) H3C-OH,  
H3C-SH 
Solution
(a) C–Br, since Br is more electronegative 
than H, (b) C–O, (c) C–O 
Problem 8.15
In which C–C bond of CH3CH2CH2Br, the 
inductive effect is expected to be the least?
Solution
Magnitude of inductive effect diminishes 
as the number of intervening bonds 
increases. Hence, the effect is least in the 
bond between carbon-3 and hydrogen.
8.7.6  Resonance Structure
There are many organic molecules whose 
behaviour cannot be explained by a single Lewis 
structure. An example is that of  
benzene. Its cyclic structure 
containing alternating  C–C single 
and C=C  double bonds shown 
is inadequate for explaining its 
characteristic properties. 
	
As per the above representation, benzene 
should exhibit two different bond lengths, 
due to C–C single and C=C double bonds. 
However, as determined experimentally 
benzene has a uniform C–C bond distances 
of 139 pm, a value intermediate between the 
C–C single(154 pm) and C=C double (134 
pm) bonds. Thus, the structure of benzene 
cannot be represented adequately by the 
above structure. Further, benzene can be 
represented equally well by the energetically 
identical structures I and II. 
benzene cannot be adequately represented 
by any of these structures, rather it is 
a hybrid of the two structures (I and II) 
called resonance structures. The resonance 
structures (canonical structures or 
contributing structures) are hypothetical 
and individually do not represent any 
real molecule. They contribute to the actual 
structure in proportion to their stability.
	
Another example of resonance is provided 
by nitromethane (CH3NO2) which can be 
represented by two Lewis structures, (I and 
II). There are two types of N-O bonds in these 
structures.
        
However, it is known that the two N–O 
bonds of nitromethane are of the same 
length (intermediate between a N–O single 
bond and a N=O double bond). The actual 
structure of nitromethane is therefore 
a resonance hybrid of the two canonical 
forms I and II. 
	
The energy of actual structure of the molecule 
(the resonance hybrid) is lower than that of 
any of the canonical structures. The difference 
in energy between the actual structure and the 
lowest energy resonance structure is called the 
resonance stabilisation energy or simply 
the resonance energy. The more the number 
of important contributing structures, the 
more is the resonance energy. Resonance is 
particularly important when the contributing 
structures are equivalent in energy.
	
The following rules are applied while writing 
resonance structures: 
	
The resonance structures have (i) the same 
positions of nuclei and (ii) the same number of 
unpaired electrons. Among the resonance 
structures, the one which has more number 
of covalent bonds, all the atoms with octet 
of electrons (except hydrogen which has a 
duplet), less separation of opposite charges, (a 
negative charge if any on more electronegative 
atom, a positive charge if any on more 
electropositive atom) and more dispersal of 
charge, is more stable than others.  
Benzene
	
Therefore, according to the resonance 
theory (Unit 4) the actual structure of 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 21 :
 276
chemistry
Problem 8.16
Write resonance structures of CH3COO– 
and show the movement of electrons by 
curved arrows.
Solution
First, write the structure and put 
unshared pairs of valence electrons on 
appropriate atoms. Then draw the arrows 
one at a time moving the electrons to get 
the other structures.
Problem 8.17
Write resonance structures of  
CH2=CH–CHO. Indicate relative stability 
of the contributing structures.
Solution
Solution
The two structures are less important 
contributors as they involve charge 
separation. Additionally, structure 
I contains a carbon atom with an 
incomplete octet.
8.7.7	
Resonance Effect
The resonance effect is defined as ‘the polarity 
produced in the molecule by the interaction 
of two π-bonds or between a π-bond and 
lone pair of electrons present on an adjacent 
atom’. The effect is transmitted through the 
chain. There are two types of resonance or 
mesomeric effect designated as R or M effect.
(i) Positive Resonance Effect (+R effect) 
In this effect, the transfer of electrons is away 
from an atom or substituent group attached 
to the conjugated system. This electron 
displacement makes certain positions in the 
molecule of high electron densities. This effect 
in aniline is shown as : 
Stability: I > II > III
[I: Most stable,  more number of covalent 
bonds, each carbon and oxygen atom has 
an octet and no separation of opposite 
charge II: negative charge on more 
electronegative atom and positive charge 
on more electropositive atom; III: does 
not contribute as oxygen has positive 
charge and carbon has negative charge, 
hence least stable].  
Problem 8.18
Explain why the following two structures, 
I and II cannot be the major contributors 
to the real structure of CH3COOCH3.
(ii) Negative Resonance Effect (- R effect)
This effect is observed when the transfer of 
electrons is towards the atom or substituent 
group attached to the conjugated system. 
For example in nitrobenzene this electron 
displacement can be depicted as : 
The atoms or substituent groups, which 
represent +R or  –R electron displacement 
effects are as follows : 
+R effect: – halogen, –OH, –OR, –OCOR, –NH2, 
–NHR, –NR2, –NHCOR, 
– R effect: – COOH, –CHO, >C=O, – CN, –NO2 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 22 :
 277
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
The presence of alternate single and 
double bonds in an open chain or cyclic system 
is termed as a conjugated system. These 
systems often show abnormal behaviour. 
The examples are 1,3- butadiene, aniline 
and nitrobenzene etc. In such systems, the 
π-electrons are delocalised and the system 
develops polarity.
8.7.8	
Electromeric Effect (E effect)
It is a temporary effect. The organic compounds 
having a multiple bond (a double or triple 
bond) show this effect in the presence of 
an attacking reagent only. It is defined as 
the complete transfer of a shared pair of  
π-electrons to one of the atoms joined by a 
multiple bond on the demand of an attacking 
reagent. The effect is annulled as soon as the 
attacking reagent is removed from the domain 
of the reaction. It is represented by E and the 
shifting of the electrons is shown by a curved 
arrow (
). There are two distinct types of 
electromeric effect. 
(i) Positive Eelctromeric Effect (+E effect) In 
this effect the π−electrons of the multiple 
bond are transferred to that atom to which 
the reagent gets attached. For example: 
system or to an atom with an unshared  
p orbital. The σ electrons of C—H bond of the 
alkyl group enter into partial conjugation with 
the attached unsaturated system or with the 
unshared p orbital. Hyperconjugation is a 
permanent effect.
To understand hyperconjugation effect, let 
us take an example of CH3 C
+ H2 (ethyl cation) in 
which the positively charged carbon atom has 
an empty p orbital. One of the C-H bonds of 
the methyl group can align in the plane of this 
empty p orbital and the electrons constituting 
the C-H bond in plane with this p orbital can 
then be delocalised into the empty p orbital 
as depicted in Fig. 8.4 (a).
(ii) Negative Electromeric Effect (–E effect) In 
this effect the π - electrons of the multiple 
bond are transferred to that atom to which 
the attacking reagent does not get attached. 
For example:
When inductive and electromeric effects 
operate in opposite directions, the electomeric 
effect predominates.
8.7.9	
Hyperconjugation
Hyperconjugation is a general stabilising 
interaction. It involves delocalisation of  
σ electrons of C—H bond of an alkyl group 
directly attached to an atom of unsaturated 
Fig. 8.4(a)	
Orbital diagram showing 
hyperconjugation in ethyl cation
This type of overlap stabilises the 
carbocation because electron density from 
the adjacent σ bond helps in dispersing the 
positive charge. 
In general, greater the number of alkyl 
groups attached to a positively charged carbon 
atom, the greater is the hyperconjugation 
interaction and stabilisation of the cation. 
Thus, we have the following relative stability 
of carbocations : 	
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 23 :
 278
chemistry
Hyperconjugation is also possible in 
alkenes and alkylarenes. 
D e l o c a l i s a t i o n  o f  e l e c t r o n s  b y 
hyperconjugation in the case of alkene can 
be depicted as in Fig. 8.4(b).
Problem 8.19 
Explain why (CH3)3C
+ is more stable 
than CH3C
+ H2 and C
+ H3 is the least stable  
cation. 
Solution 
Hyperconjugation interaction in (CH3)3C
+  is 
greater than in CH3C
+ H2 as the (CH3)3C
+   
has nine C-H bonds. In C
+ H3, vacant p 
orbital is perpendicular to the plane  
in which C-H bonds lie; hence cannot 
overlap with it. Thus, C
+ H3 lacks 
hyperconjugative stability. 
8.7.10	
Types of Organic Reactions and 
Mechanisms
Organic reactions can be classified into the 
following categories:
(i)	
Substitution reactions
(ii)	 Addition reactions
(iii)	 Elimination reactions
(iv)	 Rearrangement reactions
You will be studying these reactions in  
Unit 9 and later in class XII.
8.8	
Methods of Purification of 
Organic Compounds
Once an organic compound is extracted 
from a natural source or synthesised in the 
laboratory, it is essential to purify it. Various 
methods used for the purification of organic 
compounds are based on the nature of the 
compound and the impurity present in it. 
The common techniques used for 
purification are as follows :
(i)	
Sublimation
(ii)	 Crystallisation
(iii)	 Distillation
(iv)	 Differential extraction and
(v)	
Chromatography	
Finally, the purity of a compound is 
ascertained by determining its melting or 
boiling point. Most of the pure compounds 
have sharp melting points and boiling points. 
New methods of checking the purity of an 
organic compound are based on different 
Fig. 8.4(b)	
Orbital diagram showing 
hyperconjugation in propene
There are various ways of looking at the 
hyperconjugative effect. One of the way is to 
regard C—H bond as possessing partial ionic 
character due to resonance.
The hyperconjugation may also be 
regarded as no bond resonance.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 24 :
 279
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
types of chromatographic and spectroscopic 
techniques.
8.8.1	
Sublimation
You have learnt earlier that on heating, some 
solid substances change from solid to vapour 
state without passing through liquid state. 
The purification technique based on the above 
principle is known as sublimation and is used 
to separate sublimable compounds from non-
sublimable impurities.
8.8.2	
Crystallisation
This is one of the most commonly used 
techniques for the purification of solid organic 
compounds. It is based on the difference in 
the solubilities of the compound and the 
impurities in a suitable solvent. The impure 
compound is dissolved in a solvent in which it 
is sparingly soluble at room temperature but 
appreciably soluble at higher temperature. 
The solution is concentrated to get a nearly 
saturated solution. On cooling the solution, 
pure compound crystallises out and is 
removed by filtration. The filtrate (mother 
liquor) contains impurities and small quantity 
of the compound. If the compound is highly 
soluble in one solvent and very little  soluble 
in another solvent, crystallisation can be 
satisfactorily carried out in a mixture of these 
solvents. Impurities, which impart colour to 
the solution are removed by adsorbing over 
activated charcoal. Repeated crystallisation 
becomes necessary for the purification 
of compounds containing impurities of 
comparable solubilities.
8.8.3	
Distillation
This important method is used to separate 
(i) volatile liquids from nonvolatile impurities 
and (ii) the liquids having sufficient difference 
in their boiling points. Liquids having 
different boiling points vaporise at different 
temperatures. The vapours are cooled and 
the liquids so formed are collected separately. 
Chloroform (b.p 334 K) and aniline (b.p. 457 
K) are easily separated by the technique of 
distillation (Fig 8.5). The liquid mixture is 
taken in a round bottom flask and heated 
carefully. On boiling, the vapours of lower 
boiling component are formed first. The 
vapours are condensed by using a condenser 
and the liquid is collected in a receiver.  
The vapours of higher boiling component 
form later and the liquid can be collected 
separately.
Fractional Distillation: If the difference 
in boiling points of two liquids is not much, 
simple distillation cannot be used to separate 
them.  The vapours of such liquids are formed 
within the same temperature range and are 
condensed simultaneously.  The technique of 
fractional distillation is used in such cases. In 
this technique, vapours of a liquid mixture are 
passed through a fractionating column before 
condensation. The fractionating column is 
fitted over the mouth of the round bottom 
flask (Fig.8.6, page 280).
Vapours of the liquid with higher boiling 
point condense before the vapours of the 
liquid with lower boiling point. The vapours 
rising up in the fractionating column become 
richer in more volatile component. By the 
Fig.8.5	
Simple distillation. The vapours of a 
substance formed are condensed and 
the liquid is collected in conical flask.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 25 :
 280
chemistry
time the vapours reach to the top of the 
fractionating column, these are rich in the 
more volatile component. Fractionating 
columns are available in various sizes and 
designs as shown in Fig.8.7. A fractionating 
column provides many surfaces for heat 
exchange between the ascending vapours 
and the descending condensed liquid.  Some 
of the condensing liquid in the fractionating 
column obtains heat from the ascending 
vapours and revaporises.  The vapours thus 
become richer in low boiling component.  The 
vapours of low boiling component ascend 
to the top of the column. On reaching the 
top, the vapours become pure in low boiling 
component and pass through the condenser 
and the pure liquid is collected in a receiver.  
After a series of successive distillations, the 
remaining liquid in the distillation flask gets 
enriched in high boiling component. Each 
successive condensation and vaporisation 
Fig.8.7	
Different types of fractionating columns.
unit in the fractionating column is called a 
theoretical plate.  Commercially, columns 
with hundreds of plates are available.
One of the technological applications of 
fractional distillation is to separate different 
fractions of crude oil in petroleum industry.
Fig.8.6 	 Fractional distillation. The vapours of lower boiling 
fraction reach the top of the column first followed by 
vapours of higher boiling fractions.
Distillation under reduced 
pressure: This method is 
used to purify liquids having 
very high boiling points and 
those, which decompose at 
or below their boiling points. 
Such liquids are made to boil 
at a temperature lower than 
their normal boiling points 
by reducing the pressure on 
their surface. A liquid boils 
at a temperature at which its 
vapour pressure is equal to 
the external pressure. The 
pressure is reduced with 
the help of a water pump 
or vacuum pump (Fig.8.8). 
Glycerol can be separated from 
spent-lye in soap industry by 
using this technique.  
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 26 :
 281
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
Fig.8.8	
Distillation under reduced pressure. A liquid boils at a temperature below its 
vapour pressure by reducing the pressure.
Steam Distillation: This technique is 
applied to separate substances which are 
steam volatile and are immiscible with water. 
In steam distillation, steam from a steam 
generator is passed through a heated flask 
containing the liquid to be distilled. The 
mixture of steam and the volatile organic 
compound is condensed and collected. The 
compound is later separated from water using 
a separating funnel. In steam distillation, 
the liquid boils when the sum of vapour 
pressures due to the organic liquid (p1) 
and that due to water (p2) becomes equal to 
the atmospheric pressure (p), i.e. p =p1+ p2. 
Since p1 is lower than p, the organic liquid 
vaporises at lower temperature than its 
boiling point. 
Thus, if one of the substances in the 
mixture is water and the other, a water 
insoluble substance, then the mixture will boil 
close to but below, 373K. A mixture of water 
and the substance is obtained which can 
be separated by using a separating funnel.  
Aniline is separated by this technique from 
aniline – water mixture  (Fig.8.9, Page 282).
8.8.4	
Differential Extraction 
When an organic compound is present in an 
aqueous medium, it is separated by shaking 
it with an organic solvent in which it is more 
soluble than in water. The organic solvent and 
the aqueous solution should be immiscible 
with each other so that they form two distinct 
layers which can be separated by separatory 
funnel. The organic solvent is later removed 
by distillation or by evaporation to get back  
the compound. Differential extraction is 
carried out in a separatory funnel as shown in  
Fig. 8.10 (Page 282). If the organic compound 
is less soluble in the organic solvent, a very 
large quantity of solvent would be required 
to extract even a very small quantity of the 
compound. The technique of continuous 
extraction is employed in such cases. In this 
technique same solvent is repeatedly used for 
extraction of the compound.  
8.8.5  Chromatography
Chromatography is an important technique 
extensively used to separate mixtures into 
their components, purify compounds and 
also to test the purity of compounds. The 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 27 :
 282
chemistry
name chromatography is based on the Greek 
word chroma, for colour since the method 
was first used for the separation of coloured 
substances found in plants. In this technique, 
the mixture of substances is applied onto a 
stationary phase, which may be a solid or a 
liquid. A pure solvent, a mixture of solvents, 
or a gas is allowed to move slowly over the 
stationary phase. The components of the 
mixture get gradually separated from one 
another. The moving phase is called the 
mobile phase.
Based on the principle involved, 
chromatography is classified into different 
categories. Two of these are:
(a)	 Adsorption chromatography, and 
(b)	 Partition chromatography.  
a) Adsorption Chromatography: Adsor-
ption chromatography is based on the fact 
that different compounds are adsorbed on 
an adsorbent to different degrees. Commonly 
used adsorbents are silica gel and alumina.  
When a mobile phase is allowed to move  
over a stationary phase (adsorbent), the 
components of the mixture move by varying 
distances over the stationary phase. Following 
are two main types of chromatographic 
techniques based on the principle of differential 
adsorption.  
(a) 	 Column chromatography, and 
(b)	 Thin layer chromatography.
Fig.8.10 Differential extraction. Extraction of com-
pound takes place based on difference 
in solubility 
Fig.8.9  Steam distillation.  Steam volatile component volatilizes, the vapours condense 
in the condenser and the liquid collects in conical flask.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 28 :
 283
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
Column Chromatography: Column 
chromatography involves separation of 
a mixture over a  column of adsorbent 
(stationary phase) packed in a glass tube. 
The column is fitted with a stopcock at its 
lower end (Fig. 8.11).  The mixture adsorbed 
on adsorbent is placed on the top of the 
adsorbent column packed in a glass tube. 
An appropriate eluant which is a liquid or a 
mixture of liquids is allowed to flow down the 
column slowly.  Depending upon the degree to 
which the compounds are adsorbed, complete 
separation takes place.  The most readily 
adsorbed substances are retained near the top 
and others come down to various distances 
in the column (Fig.8.11).
The glass plate is then placed in a closed jar 
containing the eluant (Fig. 8.12a). As the 
eluant rises up the plate, the components of 
the mixture move up along with the eluant to 
different distances depending on their degree 
of adsorption and separation takes place. 
The relative adsorption of each component 
of the mixture is expressed in terms of its 
retardation factor i.e. Rf value (Fig.8.12 b).
Rf  =	
Distance moved by the substance from base line (x)     	
	
Distance moved by the solvent from base line (y)
Fig.8.11  	 Column chromatography. Different 
stages of separation of components 
of a mixture.
Thin Layer Chromatography: Thin layer 
chromatography (TLC) is another type of 
adsorption chromatography, which involves 
separation of substances of a mixture over 
a thin layer of an adsorbent coated on glass 
plate.  A thin layer (about 0.2mm thick) of 
an adsorbent (silica gel or alumina) is spread 
over a glass plate of suitable size. The plate 
is known as thin layer chromatography plate 
or chromaplate. The solution of the mixture 
to be separated is applied as a small spot 
about 2 cm above one end of the TLC plate. 
The spots of coloured compounds are 
visible on TLC plate due to their original colour. 
The spots of colourless compounds, which are 
invisible to the eye but fluoresce in ultraviolet 
light, can be detected by putting the plate under 
ultraviolet light. Another detection technique 
is to place the plate in a covered jar containing 
a few crystals of iodine. Spots of compounds, 
which adsorb iodine, will show up as brown 
spots.  Sometimes an appropriate reagent 
may also be sprayed on the plate. For example, 
amino acids may be detected by spraying the 
plate with ninhydrin solution (Fig.8.12b). 
Fig.8.12 (b)    Developed chromatogram.
Fig.8.12 (a)	
Thin layer chromatography. 
Chromatogram being developed. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 29 :
 284
chemistry
spot on the chromatogram. The spots of the 
separated colourless compounds may be 
observed either under ultraviolet light or by 
the use of an appropriate spray reagent as 
discussed under thin layer chromatography. 
8.9	
Qualitative Analysis of Organic 
Compounds
The elements present in organic compounds 
are carbon and hydrogen. In addition to 
these, they may also contain oxygen, nitrogen, 
sulphur, halogens and phosphorus.
8.9.1  Detection of Carbon and Hydrogen
Carbon and hydrogen are detected by heating 
the compound with copper(II) oxide. Carbon 
present in the compound is oxidised to 
carbon dioxide (tested with lime-water, which 
develops turbidity) and hydrogen to water 
(tested with anhydrous copper sulphate, 
which turns blue).
C + 2CuO 
 2Cu + CO2
2H + CuO 
 Cu + H2O
CO2 + Ca(OH)2 
 CaCO3↓ + H2O
5H2O + CuSO4 
 CuSO4.5H2O
	
White	
Blue
8.9.2  Detection of Other Elements 
Nitrogen, sulphur, halogens and phosphorus  
present in an organic compound are detected 
by “Lassaigne’s test”. The elements present 
in the compound are converted from covalent 
form into the ionic form by fusing the 
compound with sodium metal. Following 
reactions take place:
	
Na + C + N	
	 NaCN
	
2Na + S	
	 Na2S
	
Na + X		
	 Na X 
	
	
	
	
(X = Cl, Br or I) 
C, N, S and X come from organic compound.
Cyanide, sulphide and halide of sodium so 
formed on sodium fusion are extracted from 
the fused mass by boiling it with distilled 
water. This extract is known as sodium fusion 
extract.
(A) Test for Nitrogen 
The sodium fusion extract is boiled with  
iron(II) sulphate and then acidified with 
Partition Chromatography: Partition 
chromatography is based on continuous 
differential partitioning of components of 
a mixture between stationary and mobile 
phases. Paper chromatography is a type 
of partition chromatography. In paper 
chromatography, a special quality paper 
known as chromatography paper is used. 
Chromatography paper contains water trapped 
in it, which acts as the stationary phase.
A strip of chromatography paper spotted 
at the base with the solution of the mixture is 
suspended in a suitable solvent or a mixture 
of solvents (Fig. 8.13). This solvent acts as the 
mobile phase. The solvent rises up the paper 
by capillary action and flows over the spot. The 
paper selectively retains different components 
according to their differing partition in the 
two phases.   The paper strip so developed is 
known as a chromatogram.  The spots of the 
separated coloured compounds are visible at 
different heights from the position of initial 
Fig.8.13	
Paper chromatography.
	
Chromatography paper in two different 
shapes.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 30 :
 285
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
concentrated sulphuric acid. The formation  
of Prussian blue colour confirms the presence 
of nitrogen. Sodium cyanide first reacts  
with iron(II) sulphate and forms sodium 
hexacyanidoferrate(II). On heating with 
concentrated sulphuric acid some iron(II) 
ions are oxidised to iron(III) ions which 
react with sodium hexacyanidoferrate(II) 
to produce iron(III) hexacyanidoferrate(II) 
(ferriferrocyanide) which is Prussian blue in 
colour. 
6CN– + Fe2+  →   [Fe(CN)6]4– 
3[Fe(CN)6]4– + 4Fe3+ 
 Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3.xH2O

Prussian blue
(B) Test for Sulphur 
(a) 	 The sodium fusion extract is acidified 
with acetic acid and lead acetate is added 
to it. A black precipitate of lead sulphide 
indicates the presence of sulphur.
	
	
S2– + Pb2+	 →	PbS 
	
	
	
	
	
Black
(b) 	 On treating sodium fusion extract with 
sodium nitroprusside, appearance of 
a violet colour further indicates the 
presence of sulphur.
S2– + [Fe(CN)5NO]2–	
→	
[Fe(CN)5NOS]4–
	
	
	
	
	
Violet
In case, nitrogen and sulphur both are 
present in an organic compound, sodium 
thiocyanate is formed. It gives blood red colour 
and no Prussian blue since there are no free 
cyanide ions.
	
Na + C + N + S →	       NaSCN
	
Fe3+ +SCN–	
  →	      [Fe(SCN)]2+
	
	
	
	
           Blood red
If sodium fusion is carried out with excess 
of sodium, the thiocyanate decomposes to 
yield cyanide and sulphide. These ions give 
their usual tests.
	
NaSCN + 2Na   →	  NaCN+Na2S
(C) Test for Halogens 
The sodium fusion extract is acidified with 
nitric acid and then treated with silver nitrate. 
A white precipitate, soluble in ammonium 
hydroxide shows the presence of chlorine, 
a yellowish precipitate, sparingly soluble in 
ammonium hydroxide shows the presence of 
bromine and a yellow precipitate, insoluble 
in ammonium hydroxide shows the presence 
of iodine.
	
X– + Ag+	→	
AgX
X represents a halogen – Cl, Br or I.
If nitrogen or sulphur is also present in the 
compound, the sodium fusion extract is 
first boiled with concentrated nitric acid to 
decompose cyanide or sulphide of sodium 
formed during Lassaigne’s test. These ions 
would otherwise interfere with silver nitrate 
test for halogens.
(D) Test for Phosphorus 
The compound is heated with an oxidising 
agent (sodium peroxide). The phosphorus 
present in the compound is oxidised to 
phosphate. The solution is boiled with nitric 
acid and then treated with ammonium 
molybdate. A yellow colouration or precipitate 
indicates the presence of phosphorus.     
Na3PO4 + 3HNO3  →  H3PO4+3NaNO3
H3PO4   +	 12(NH4)2MoO4   +   21HNO3 →
	
Ammonium
	
	
molybdate
	
(NH4)3PO4.12MoO3 + 21NH4NO3 + 12H2O
	
Ammonium
	
phosphomolybdate
8.10  Quantitative Analysis
Quantitative analysis of compounds is very 
important in organic chemistry. It helps 
chemists in the determination of mass per 
cent of elements present in a compound. You 
have learnt in Unit-1 that mass per cent of 
elements is required for the determination of 
emperical and molecular formula.
The percentage composition of elements 
present in an organic compound is determined 
by the following methods:
8.10.1  Carbon and Hydrogen 
Both carbon and hydrogen are estimated in 
one experiment. A known mass of an organic 
compound is burnt in the presence of  excess 
of oxygen and copper(II) oxide. Carbon and 
hydrogen in the compound are oxidised to 
carbon dioxide and water respectively.
CxHy + (x  +  y/4) O2 → x CO2  +  (y/2) H2O
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 31 :
 286
chemistry
The mass of water produced is determined 
by passing the mixture through a weighed 
U-tube containing anhydrous calcium chloride. 
Carbon dioxide is absorbed in another U-tube 
containing concentrated solution of potassium 
hydroxide. These tubes are connected in series 
(Fig. 8.14). The increase in masses of calcium 
chloride and potassium hydroxide gives the 
amounts of water and carbon dioxide from 
which the percentages of carbon and hydrogen 
are calculated.
Let the mass of organic compound be  
m g, mass of water and carbon dioxide 
produced be m1 and m2 g respectively;
Percentage of carbon=  
2
12
100
44
m
m
×
×
×
Percentage of hydrogen  = 
1
2
100
18
m
m
×
×
×
 	 Problem 8.20 
On complete combustion, 0.246 g of an 
organic compound gave 0.198g of carbon 
dioxide and 0.1014g of water.  Determine 
the percentage composition of carbon 
and hydrogen in the compound.
Solution	
   
12
0.198 100
Percentageof carbon
44
0.246
21.95%
×
×
=
×
=
   Percentage of hydrogen 
2
0.1014 100
18
0.246
4.58%
×
×
=
×
=
8.10.2  Nitrogen 
There are two methods for estimation of 
nitrogen: (i) Dumas method and (ii) Kjeldahl’s 
method.
(i) Dumas method: The nitrogen containing 
organic compound, when heated with copper 
oxide in an atmosphere of carbon dioxide, 
yields free nitrogen in addition to carbon 
dioxide and water.
CxHyNz + (2x  +  y/2) CuO  →  
    x CO2 + y/2 H2O  +  z/2 N2 + (2x + y/2) Cu
Traces of nitrogen oxides formed, if 
any, are reduced to nitrogen by passing the 
gaseous mixture over a heated copper gauze. 
The mixture of gases so produced is collected 
over an aqueous solution of potassium 
hydroxide which absorbs carbon dioxide. 
Nitrogen is collected in the upper part of the 
graduated tube (Fig.8.15).
Let the mass of organic compound  = m g
Volume of nitrogen collected = V1 mL
Room temperature = T1K
1 1
1
273
Volumeof nitrogen atSTP
760
(Letit be
mL)
PV
T
V
×
=
×
Where p1 and V1 are the pressure and 
volume of nitrogen, p1 is different from the 
atmospheric pressure at which nitrogen gas 
is collected.  The value of p1 is obtained by 
the relation;
p1= Atmospheric pressure – Aqueous tension
22400 mL N2 at STP weighs 28 g.
Fig.8.14	
Estimation of carbon and hydrogen. Water and carbon dioxide formed on oxidation of substance 
are absorbed in anhydrous calcium chloride and potassium hydroxide solutions respectively 
contained in U tubes.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 32 :
 287
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
2
28
mL N atSTP weighs
g
22400
V
V
×
=
Percentage of nitrogen = 28
100
22400
V
m
×
×
×
Problem 8.21
In Dumas’ method for estimation of 
nitrogen, 0.3g of an organic compound 
gave 50mL of nitrogen collected at 300K 
temperature and 715mm pressure. 
Calculate the percentage composition 
of nitrogen in the compound. (Aqueous 
tension at 300K=15 mm)
Solution 
Volume of nitrogen collected at 300K and 
715mm pressure is 50 mL
Actual pressure = 715-15 =700 mm
273
700
50
Volumeof nitrogen atSTP
300
760
41.9mL
×
×
×
22,400 mL of N2 at STP weighs  =  28 g
28
41.9
41.9mLof nitrogen weighs
22400
g
×
=
28
41.9 100
Percentageof nitrogen
22400
0.3
17.46%
×
×
=
×
=
Fig. 8.15	 Dumas method.  The organic compound yields nitrogen gas on heating it with 
copper(II) oxide in the presence of CO2 gas. The mixture of gases is collected over 
potassium hydroxide solution in which CO2 is absorbed and volume of nitrogen 
gas is determined.
(ii) Kjeldahl’s method: The compound 
containing nitrogen is heated with concentrated 
sulphuric acid. Nitrogen in the compound 
gets converted to ammonium sulphate  
(Fig. 8.16). The resulting acid mixture is then 
heated with excess of sodium hydroxide. 
The liberated ammonia gas is absorbed in 
an excess of standard solution of sulphuric 
acid. The amount of ammonia produced is 
determined by estimating the amount of 
sulphuric acid consumed in the reaction. It 
is done by estimating unreacted sulphuric 
acid left after the absorption of ammonia by 
titrating it with standard alkali solution. The 
difference between the initial amount of acid 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 33 :
 288
chemistry
taken and that left after the reaction gives the 
amount of acid reacted with ammonia. 
Organic compound + H2SO4  →  (NH4)2SO4   
	
 Na2SO4 + 2NH3 + 2H2O
2NH3   + H2SO4   →   (NH4)2SO4
Let the mass of organic compound taken = m g
Volume of H2SO4 of molarity, M,  
taken  =  V mL
Volume of NaOH of molarity, M, used for 
titration of excess of  H2SO4 = V1 mL
V1mL of NaOH of molarity M  
	
= V1 /2 mL of  H2SO4 of molarity M
Volume of H2SO4 of molarity M unused  
= (V - V1/2) mL
(V- V1/2) mL of  H2SO4  of molarity M  
	
=  2(V-V1/2) mL of NH3 solution of 
molarity M.
1000 mL of 1 M NH3 solution contains  
17g NH3 or 14 g of N
2(V-V1/2) mL of  NH3 solution of molarity M 
contains:
	
 
1
14
M
2(V
V / 2) g N
1000
×
×
−
 
1
14
M
2(V
V / 2)
100
Percentageof N
1000
1.4
M
2(V
V / 2)
m
m
×
×
−
=
×
×
×
−
=
Kjeldahl method is not applicable to 
compounds containing nitrogen in nitro and 
azo groups and nitrogen present in the ring 
(e.g. pyridine) as nitrogen of these compounds 
does not change to ammonium sulphate 
under these conditions.
Problem 8.22
During estimation of nitrogen present 
in an organic compound by Kjeldahl’s 
method, the ammonia evolved from 
0.5 g of the compound in Kjeldahl’s 
estimation of nitrogen, neutralized 10 mL 
of 1 M H2SO4. Find out the percentage of 
nitrogen in the compound.
Solution           
1 M of 10 mL H2SO4=1M of  20 mL NH3
1000 mL of 1M ammonia contains 14 g 
nitrogen
20 mL of 1M ammonia contains  
Fig.8.16	
Kjeldahl method. Nitrogen-containing compound is treated with concentrated H2SO4 to get 
ammonium sulphate which liberates ammonia on treating with NaOH; ammonia is absorbed 
in known volume of standard acid.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 34 :
 289
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
14
20
1000
×
 g  nitrogen
14×20×100
Percentageof nitrogen
=56.0%
1000×0.5
=
                  
8.10.3  Halogens
Carius method:  A known mass of an organic 
compound is heated with fuming nitric acid in 
the presence of silver nitrate contained in a hard 
glass tube known as Carius tube, (Fig.8.17) 
Percentage of halogen
	
1
atomicmassof X
m g
molecular massof AgX
×
=
 
Problem 8.23
In Carius method of estimation of 
halogen, 0.15 g of an organic compound 
gave 0.12 g of AgBr. Find out the 
percentage of bromine in the compound.
Solution 
Molar mass of AgBr = 108 + 80  
                                       = 188 g mol-1
188 g AgBr contains 80 g bromine
0.12 g AgBr contains 
×
80
0.12
188
 g bromine
×
×
=
=
80
0.12
100
Percentage of bromine
188×0.15
34.04%
8.10.4  Sulphur 
A known mass of an organic compound is 
heated in a Carius tube with sodium peroxide 
or fuming nitric acid. Sulphur present in the 
compound is oxidised to sulphuric acid.  It 
is precipitated as barium sulphate by adding 
excess of barium chloride solution in water. 
The precipitate is filtered, washed, dried and 
weighed. The percentage of sulphur can be 
calculated from the mass of barium sulphate.
Let the mass of organic 
	
	
compound taken =  m g
and the mass of barium 
	
	
sulphate formed = m1g
1 mol of BaSO4 = 233 g BaSO4 = 32 g sulphur
m1 g BaSO4 contains 
1
32
233
m
×
×
 g sulphur
1
32
100
Percentageof sulphur
233
m
m
×
×
=
×
Fig. 8.17	 Carius method. Halogen containing  
organic compound is heated with fuming 
nitric acid in the presence of silver 
nitrate.
 in a furnace. Carbon and hydrogen present in 
the compound are oxidised to carbon dioxide 
and water. The halogen present forms the 
corresponding silver halide (AgX). It is filtered, 
washed, dried and weighed.
Let the mass of organic 
  compound taken = m g 
Mass of AgX formed = m1 g 
1 mol of AgX contains 1 mol of  X
Mass of halogen in m1g of AgX
	
1
atomicmassof X
m g
molecular massof AgX
×
=
Problem 8.24
In sulphur estimation, 0.157 g of an 
organic compound gave 0.4813 g of 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 35 :
 290
chemistry
percentage composition (100) and the sum of 
the percentages of all other elements. However, 
oxygen can also be estimated directly as follows:
A definite mass of an organic compound is 
decomposed by heating in a stream of nitrogen 
gas. The mixture of gaseous products containing 
oxygen is passed over red-hot coke when all 
the oxygen is converted to carbon monoxide. 
This mixture is passed through warm iodine 
pentoxide (I2O5) when  carbon monoxide is 
oxidised to carbon dioxide producing iodine.
Compound 
heat

→

 O2 + other gaseous 	 	
	
	
	
	
	
    products  
2C + O2 
1373 K

→
 2CO]× 5	 	
(A)
I2O5 + 5CO → I2  +   5CO2]× 2	
(B)
On making the amount of CO produced in 
equation (A) equal to the amount of CO used 
in equation (B) by multiplying the equations 
(A) and (B) by 5 and 2 respectively; we find 
that each mole of oxygen liberated from 
the compound will produce two moles of 
carbondioxide.
Thus 88 g carbon dioxide is obtained if 32 g 
oxygen is liberated.
Let the mass of organic compound taken be m g 
Mass of carbon dioxide produced be m1 g
∴ m1 g carbon dioxide is obtained from 
1
2
32
g O
88
m
×
∴Percentage of oxygen = 
1
32
100 %
88
m
m
×
×
×
The percentage of oxygen can be derived 
from the amount of iodine produced also.
Presently, the estimation of elements in 
an organic compound is carried out by using 
microquantities of substances and automatic 
experimental techniques. The elements, 
carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen present in a 
compound are determined by an apparatus 
known as CHN elemental analyser. The 
analyser requires only a very small amount 
of the substance (1-3 mg) and displays the 
values on a screen within a short time. A 
detailed discussion of such methods is beyond 
the scope of this book.
barium sulphate.  What is the percentage 
of sulphur in the compound?
Solution   
Molecular mass of BaSO4  = 137+32+64
	
	
	
	
	
 = 233 g 
233 g BaSO4 contains 32 g sulphur
0.4813 g BaSO4 contains 32
0.4813 g
233
×
 
g  sulphur
32
0.4813
100
Percentageof sulphur
233
0.157
42.10%
×
×
=
×
=
8.10.5  Phosphorus 
A known mass of an organic compound is 
heated with fuming nitric acid whereupon 
phosphorus present in the compound is 
oxidised to phosphoric acid. It is precipitated 
as ammonium phosphomolybdate, (NH4)3 
PO4.12MoO3, by adding ammonia and 
ammonium molybdate. Alternatively, 
phosphoric acid may be precipitated as 
MgNH4PO4 by adding magnesia mixture which 
on ignition yields Mg2P2O7.
Let the mass of organic compound taken  
= m g and mass of ammonium phospho 
molydate = m1g
Molar mass of (NH4)3PO4.12MoO3 = 1877g
Percentage of phosphorus 
1
31
100 %
1877
m
m
×
×
=
×
If phosphorus is estimated as Mg2P2O7, 
Percentage of phosphorus 
1
62
100
222
m
×
×
=
× 
where, 222 u is the molar mass of Mg2P2O7, 
m, the mass of organic compound taken, 
m1, the mass of Mg2P2O7 formed and 62, the 
mass of two phosphorus atoms present in the 
compound Mg2P2O7.
8.10.6  Oxygen 
The percentage of oxygen in an organic compound 
is usually found by difference between the total 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 36 :
 291
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
Summary
In this unit, we have learnt some basic concepts in structure and reactivity of organic 
compounds, which are formed due to covalent bonding. The nature of the covalent bonding 
in organic compounds can be described in terms of orbitals hybridisation concept, 
according to which carbon can have sp3, sp2 and sp hybridised orbitals. The sp3, sp2 and sp 
hybridised carbons are found in compounds like methane, ethene and ethyne respectively. 
The tetrahedral shape of methane, planar shape of ethene and linear shape of ethyne can 
be understood on the basis of this concept. A sp3 hybrid orbital can overlap with 1s orbital 
of hydrogen to give a carbon - hydrogen (C–H) single bond (sigma, σ bond). Overlap of a sp2 
orbital of one carbon with sp2 orbital of another results in the formation of a carbon–carbon 
σ bond. The unhybridised p orbitals on two adjacent carbons can undergo lateral (side-
by-side) overlap to give a pi (π) bond. Organic compounds can be represented by various 
structural formulas. The three dimensional representation of organic compounds on paper 
can be drawn by wedge and dash formula.
Organic compounds can be classified on the basis of their structure or the functional 
groups they contain. A functional group is an atom or group of atoms bonded together in a 
unique fashion and which determines the physical and  chemical properties of the compounds. 
The naming of the organic compounds is carried out by following a set of rules laid down by 
the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC). In IUPAC nomenclature, 
the names are correlated with the structure in such a way that the reader can deduce the 
structure from the name.
Organic reaction mechanism concepts are based on the structure of the substrate 
molecule, fission of a covalent bond, the attacking reagents, the electron displacement effects 
and the conditions of the reaction. These organic reactions involve breaking and making 
of covalent bonds. A covalent bond may be cleaved in heterolytic or homolytic fashion. 
A heterolytic cleavage yields carbocations or carbanions, while a homolytic cleavage gives 
free radicals as reactive intermediate. Reactions proceeding through heterolytic cleavage 
involve the complimentary pairs of reactive species. These are electron pair donor known as 
nucleophile and an electron pair acceptor known as electrophile. The inductive, resonance, 
electromeric and hyperconjugation effects may help in the polarisation of a bond making 
certain carbon atom or other atom positions as places of low or high electron densities.
Organic reactions can be broadly classified into following types; substitution, addition, 
elimination and rearrangement reactions. 
Purification, qualitative and quantitative analysis of organic compounds are carried out 
for determining their structures. The methods of purification namely : sublimation, distillation 
and differential extraction are based on the difference in one or more physical properties. 
Chromatography is a useful technique of separation, identification and purification of 
compounds. It is classified into two categories : adsorption and partition chromatography. 
Adsorption chromatography is based on differential adsorption of various components of a 
mixture on an adsorbent. Partition chromatography involves continuous partitioning of the 
components of a mixture between stationary and mobile phases. After getting the compound 
in a pure form, its qualitative analysis is carried out for detection of elements present in it. 
Nitrogen, sulphur, halogens and phosphorus are detected by Lassaigne’s test. Carbon and 
hydrogen are estimated by determining the amounts of carbon dioxide and water produced. 
Nitrogen is estimated by Dumas or Kjeldahl’s method and halogens by Carius method. 
Sulphur and phosphorus are estimated by oxidising them to sulphuric and phosphoric acids 
respectively. The percentage of oxygen is usually determined by difference between the total 
percentage (100) and the sum of percentages of all other elements present.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 37 :
 292
chemistry
Exercises
8.1	
What are hybridisation states of each carbon atom in the following compounds ?
	
CH2=C=O, CH3CH=CH2, (CH3)2CO, CH2=CHCN, C6H6
8.2	
Indicate the σ and π bonds in the following molecules :
	
C6H6, C6H12, CH2Cl2, CH2=C=CH2, CH3NO2, HCONHCH3
8.3	
Write bond line formulas for : Isopropyl alcohol, 2,3-Dimethylbutanal, Heptan-4-one.
8.4	
Give the IUPAC names of the following compounds :
	
(a)
	
(b)  
	
(c) 
	
(d) 
	 (e) 
	
(f) Cl2CHCH2OH
8.5	
Which of the following represents the correct IUPAC name for the compounds  
concer ned ? (a) 2,2-Dimethylpentane or 2-Dimethylpentane (b) 
2,4,7-Trimethyloctane or 2,5,7-Trimethyloctane (c) 2-Chloro-4-methylpentane or  
4-Chloro-2-methylpentane (d) But-3-yn-1-ol or But-4-ol-1-yne.
8.6	
Draw formulas for the first five members of each homologous series beginning with 
the following compounds. (a) H–COOH (b) CH3COCH3 (c) H–CH=CH2
8.7	
Give condensed and bond line structural formulas and identify the functional group(s) 
present, if any, for : 
	
(a) 2,2,4-Trimethylpentane
	
(b) 2-Hydroxy-1,2,3-propanetricarboxylic acid
	
(c) Hexanedial
8.8	
Identify the functional groups in the following compounds
	
(a)  
 	
(b)  
	
(c)   
8.9	
Which of the two: O2NCH2CH2O– or CH3CH2O– is expected to be more stable and  
why?
8.10	
Explain why alkyl groups act as electron donors when attached to a π system.
8.11	
Draw the resonance structures for the following compounds. Show the electron shift 
using curved-arrow notation.
	
(a) C6H5OH (b) C6H5NO2 (c) CH3CH=CHCHO (d) C6H5–CHO (e) C6H5–C
+  
H2 
(f) CH3CH=CH C
+ H2
8.12	
What are electrophiles and nucleophiles ? Explain with examples.
8.13	
Identify the reagents shown in bold in the following equations as nucleophiles or 
electrophiles:
	
(a) CH3COOH + HO
– → CH3COO–+H2O 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 38 :
 293
organic chemistry – some basic principles and techniques 
	
(b) CH3COCH3+ C
–  N → (CH3)2C(CN)(OH) 
	
(c) C6H6 + CH3C
+   O → C6H5COCH3
8.14	
Classify the following reactions in one of the reaction type studied in this unit.
	
(a) CH3CH2Br + HS
–  →  CH3CH2SH + Br
–
	
(b) (CH3)2C = CH2  +  HCI  →  (CH3)2CIC – CH3
	
(c) CH3CH2Br  +  HO
–  →  CH2 = CH2 + H2O + Br
–
	
(d) (CH3)3C– CH2OH + HBr  →  (CH3)2CBrCH2CH2CH3 + H2O 
8.15	
What is the relationship between the members of following pairs of structures ? 
Are they structural or geometrical isomers or resonance contributors ?
	
(a)   
	
(b)    
	
(c)    
	
8.16	
For the following bond cleavages, use curved-arrows to show the electron flow and 
classify each as homolysis or heterolysis. Identify reactive intermediate produced 
as free radical, carbocation and carbanion.
	
(a)  
	
(b)  
	
(c)  
	
(d)  
8.17	
Explain the terms Inductive and Electromeric effects. Which electron displacement 
effect explains the following correct orders of acidity of the carboxylic acids?
	
(a)	 Cl3CCOOH > Cl2CHCOOH > ClCH2COOH
	
(b)	 CH3CH2COOH > (CH3)2CHCOOH > (CH3)3C.COOH
8.18	
Give a brief description of the principles of the following techniques taking an 
example in each case.
	
(a) Crystallisation  (b) Distillation   (c) Chromatography
8.19	
Describe the method, which can be used to separate two compounds with different 
solubilities in a solvent S.
8.20	
What is the difference between distillation, distillation under reduced pressure and 
steam distillation ?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 39 :
 294
chemistry
8.21	
Discuss the chemistry of Lassaigne’s test.
8.22	
Differentiate between the principle of estimation of nitrogen in an organic compound 
by (i) Dumas method  and (ii) Kjeldahl’s method.
8.23	
Discuss the principle of estimation of halogens, sulphur and phosphorus present 
in an organic compound.
8.24	
Explain the principle of paper chromatography.
8.25	
Why is nitric acid added to sodium extract before adding silver nitrate for testing 
halogens?
8.26	
Explain the reason for the fusion of an organic compound with metallic sodium for 
testing nitrogen, sulphur and halogens.
8.27	
Name a suitable technique of separation of the components from a mixture of 
calcium sulphate and camphor.
8.28	
Explain, why an organic liquid vaporises at a temperature below its boiling point 
in its steam distillation ?
8.29	
Will CCl4 give white precipitate of AgCl on heating it with silver nitrate? Give reason 
for your answer.
8.30	
Why is a solution of potassium hydroxide used to absorb carbon dioxide evolved 
during the estimation of carbon present in an organic compound?
8.31	
Why is it necessary to use acetic acid and not sulphuric acid for acidification of 
sodium extract for testing sulphur by lead acetate test?
8.32	
An organic compound contains 69% carbon and 4.8% hydrogen, the remainder 
being oxygen. Calculate the masses of carbon dioxide and water produced when 
0.20 g of this substance is subjected to complete combustion.
8.33	
A sample of 0.50 g of an organic compound was treated according to Kjeldahl’s 
method. The ammonia evolved was absorbed in 50 ml of 0.5 M H2SO4. The residual 
acid required 60 mL of 0.5 M solution of NaOH for neutralisation. Find the percentage 
composition of nitrogen in the compound.
8.34	
0.3780 g of an organic chloro compound gave 0.5740 g of silver chloride in Carius 
estimation. Calculate the percentage of chlorine present in the compound.
8.35	
In the estimation of sulphur by Carius method, 0.468 g of an organic sulphur 
compound afforded 0.668 g of barium sulphate. Find out the percentage of sulphur 
in the given compound. 
8.36	
In the organic compound CH2 = CH – CH2 – CH2 – C ≡ CH, the pair of hydridised 
orbitals involved in the formation of: C2 – C3 bond is: 
	
(a) sp – sp2  (b) sp – sp3  (c) sp2 – sp3  (d) sp3 – sp3
8.37	
In the Lassaigne’s test for nitrogen in an organic compound, the Prussian blue 
colour is obtained due to the formation of:
	
(a) Na4[Fe(CN)6]  (b) Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3  (c) Fe2[Fe(CN)6]  (d) Fe3[Fe(CN)6]4
8.38	
Which of the following carbocation is most stable ?
	
(a) (CH3)3C. C
+ ­ H2  (b) (CH3)3C
+ ­   (c) CH3CH2C
+ ­ H2  (d) CH3C
+ ­ H CH2CH3
8.39	
The best and latest technique for isolation, purification and separation of organic 
compounds is:
	
(a) Crystallisation  (b) Distillation  (c) Sublimation  (d) Chromatography
8.40	
The reaction:
	
CH3CH2I + KOH(aq) → CH3CH2OH + KI
	
is classified as :
	
(a) electrophilic substitution  (b) nucleophilic substitution
	
(c) elimination  (d) addition
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 1 :
 295
Hydrocarbons
Unit 9
After studying this unit, you will be 
able to 
•	
name hydrocarbons according to 
IUPAC system of nomenclature; 
•	
recognise and write structures  
o f  i s o m e r s  o f  a l k a n e s , 
alkenes, alkynes and aromatic 
hydrocarbons;
•	
learn about various methods of 
preparation of hydrocarbons;
•	
distinguish between alkanes, 
alkenes, alkynes and aromatic 
hydrocarbons on the basis of 
physical and chemical properties;
•	
draw and differentiate between 
various conformations of ethane;
•	
a p p r e c i a t e  t h e  r o l e  o f 
hydrocarbons as sources of  
energy and for other industrial 
applications;
•	
pr edict the for mation of 
the addition products of 
unsymmetrical alkenes and 
alkynes on the basis of electronic 
mechanism;
•	
comprehend the structure of 
benzene, explain aromaticity  
and understand mechanism  
of electrophilic substitution 
reactions of benzene; 
•	
predict the directive influence of 
substituents in monosubstituted 
benzene ring;
•	
learn about carcinogenicity and 
toxicity.
Hydrocarbons
The term ‘hydrocarbon’ is self-explanatory which means 
compounds of carbon and hydrogen only. Hydrocarbons 
play a key role in our daily life. You must be familiar 
with the terms ‘LPG’ and ‘CNG’ used as fuels. LPG is the 
abbreviated form of liquified petroleum gas whereas CNG 
stands for compressed natural gas. Another term ‘LNG’ 
(liquified natural gas) is also in news these days. This is 
also a fuel and is obtained by liquifaction of natural gas. 
Petrol, diesel and kerosene oil are obtained by the fractional 
distillation of petroleum found under the earth’s crust.  
Coal gas is obtained by the destructive distillation of 
coal. Natural gas is found in upper strata during drilling 
of oil wells. The gas after compression is known as 
compressed natural gas. LPG is used as a domestic fuel 
with the least pollution. Kerosene oil is also used as a 
domestic fuel but it causes some pollution. Automobiles 
need fuels like petrol, diesel and CNG. Petrol and CNG 
operated automobiles cause less pollution. All these fuels 
contain mixture of hydrocarbons, which are sources of 
energy. Hydrocarbons are also used for the manufacture 
of polymers like polythene, polypropene, polystyrene etc. 
Higher hydrocarbons are used as solvents for paints. They 
are also used as the starting materials for manufacture 
of many dyes and drugs. Thus, you can well understand 
the importance of hydrocarbons in your daily life. In this 
unit, you will learn more about hydrocarbons.
9.1	 CLASSIFICATION
Hydrocarbons are of different types. Depending upon 
the types of carbon-carbon bonds present, they can 
be classified into three main categories – (i) saturated  
Hydrocarbons are the important sources of energy.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 2 :
 296
chemistry
(ii) unsaturated and (iii) aromatic 
hydrocarbons. Saturated hydrocarbons 
contain carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen 
single bonds. If different carbon atoms are 
joined together to form open chain of carbon 
atoms with single bonds, they are termed 
as alkanes as you have already studied in  
Unit 8. On the other hand, if carbon atoms 
form a closed chain or a ring, they are termed 
as cycloalkanes. Unsaturated hydrocarbons 
contain carbon-carbon multiple bonds – 
double bonds, triple bonds or both. Aromatic 
hydrocarbons are a special type of cyclic 
compounds. You can construct a large 
number of models of such molecules of both 
types (open chain and close chain) keeping 
in mind that carbon is tetravalent and 
hydrogen is monovalent. For making models 
of alkanes, you can use toothpicks for bonds 
and plasticine balls for atoms. For alkenes, 
alkynes and aromatic hydrocarbons, spring 
models can be constructed.
9.2  ALKANES	
As already mentioned, alkanes are saturated 
open chain hydrocarbons containing  
carbon - carbon single bonds. Methane (CH4) 
is the first member of this family. Methane is 
a gas found in coal mines and marshy places. 
If you replace one hydrogen atom of methane 
by carbon and join the required number of 
hydrogens to satisfy the tetravalence of the 
other carbon atom, what do you get? You 
get C2H6. This hydrocarbon with molecular 
formula C2H6 is known as ethane. Thus you 
can consider C2H6 as derived from CH4 by 
replacing one hydrogen atom by -CH3 group. 
Go on constructing alkanes by doing this 
theoretical exercise i.e., replacing hydrogen 
atom by –CH3 group. The next molecules will 
be C3H8, C4H10 … 
of the general formula for alkane family 
or homologous series? If we examine the 
formula of different alkanes we find that 
the general formula for alkanes is CnH2n+2. It 
represents any particular homologue when n 
is given appropriate value. Can you recall the 
structure of methane? According to VSEPR 
theory (Unit 4), methane has a tetrahedral 
structure (Fig. 9.1), in which carbon atom lies 
at the centre and the four hydrogen atoms lie 
at the four corners of a regular tetrahedron. 
All H-C-H  bond angles are of 109.5°. 
In alkanes, tetrahedra are joined together 
in which C-C and C-H bond lengths are  
154 pm and 112 pm respectively (Unit 8). 
You have already read that C–C and C–H σ 
bonds are formed by head-on overlapping of 
sp
3 hybrid orbitals of carbon and 1s orbitals 
of hydrogen atoms.
9.2.1	
Nomenclature and Isomerism 
You have already read about nomenclature 
of different classes of organic compounds 
in Unit 8. Nomenclature and isomerism 
in alkanes can further be understood with 
the help of a few more examples. Common 
names are given in parenthesis. First three 
alkanes – methane, ethane and propane have 
only one structure but higher alkanes can 
have more than one structure. Let us write 
structures for C4H10. Four carbon atoms of 
C4H10 can be joined either in a continuous 
chain or with a branched chain in the 
following two ways :
Fig. 9.1  Structure of methane
  	 Butane (n- butane), (b.p. 273 K)
I
	
H	
H	 H	 	
	
	
	
H—C—H 
replace any H by - CH3  H—C—C—H or C2H6
	
	
	
	
H	
H	 H	
	
These hydrocarbons are inert under 
normal conditions as they do not react with 
acids, bases and other reagents. Hence, 
they were earlier known as paraffins (latin : 
parum, little; affinis, affinity). Can you think 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 3 :
 297
Hydrocarbons
	
In how many ways, you can join five 
carbon atoms and twelve hydrogen atoms of 
C5H12? They can be arranged in three ways 
as shown in structures III–V
isomers. It is also clear that structures I and 
III have continuous chain of carbon atoms 
but structures II, IV and V have a branched 
chain. Such structural isomers which differ 
in chain of carbon atoms are known as chain 
isomers. Thus, you have seen that C4H10 
and C5H12 have two and three chain isomers 
respectively.
Problem 9.1
Write structures of different chain 
isomers of alkanes corresponding to the 
molecular formula C6H14. Also write their 
IUPAC names.
Solution
(i)	 CH3 – CH2 – CH2 – CH2– CH2– CH3
n-Hexane
2-Methylpentane
3-Methylpentane
2,3-Dimethylbutane
	
2,2 - Dimethylbutane
	
Based upon the number of carbon atoms 
attached to a carbon atom, the carbon atom is 
termed as primary (1°), secondary (2°), tertiary 
(3°) or quaternary (4°). Carbon atom attached 
to no other carbon atom as in methane or to 
only one carbon atom as in ethane is called 
primary carbon atom. Terminal carbon 
atoms are always primary. Carbon atom 
attached to two carbon atoms is known as 
secondary. Tertiary carbon is attached to 
three carbon atoms and neo or quaternary 
carbon is attached to four carbon atoms. Can 
you identify 1°, 2°, 3° and 4° carbon atoms in 
II
2-Methylpropane (isobutane) 
	
(b.p.261 K)
Structures I and II possess same molecular 
formula but differ in their boiling points and 
other properties. Similarly structures III, IV 
and V possess the same molecular formula 
but have different properties. Structures I and 
II are isomers of butane, whereas structures 
III, IV and V are isomers of pentane. Since 
difference in properties is due to difference in 
their structures, they are known as structural 
III
Pentane (n-pentane)
(b.p. 309 K)
	
2-Methylbutane (isopentane) 
(b.p. 301 K)
IV
2,2-Dimethylpropane (neopentane) 
(b.p. 282.5 K)
V
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 4 :
 298
chemistry
structures I to V ? If you go on constructing 
structures for higher alkanes, you will be 
getting still larger number of isomers. C6H14 
has got five isomers and C7H16 has nine. As 
many as 75 isomers are possible for C10H22.
	
In structures II, IV and V, you observed 
that –CH3 group is attached to carbon atom 
numbered as 2. You will come across groups 
like –CH3, –C2H5, –C3H7 etc. attached to 
carbon atoms in alkanes or other classes of 
compounds.  These groups or substituents 
are known as alkyl groups as they are derived 
from alkanes by removal of one hydrogen 
atom. General formula for alkyl groups is 
CnH2n+1 (Unit 8). 
	
Let us recall the general rules for 
nomenclature already discussed in Unit 8. 
Nomenclature of substituted alkanes can 
further be understood by considering the 
following problem:
Problem 9.2
Write structures of different isomeric alkyl groups corresponding to the molecular formula 
C5H11. Write IUPAC names of alcohols obtained by attachment of  –OH groups at different 
carbons of the chain.
Solution
Structures of – C5H11 group	
Corresponding alcohols	
Name of alcohol
 (i)	 CH3 – CH2 – CH2 – CH2– CH2 –   	CH3 – CH2 – CH2 – CH2– CH2 – OH	
Pentan-1-ol
(ii)	 CH3 – CH – CH2 – CH2 – CH3	
CH3 – CH – CH2 – CH2– CH3	
Pentan-2-ol
	
|	
|
	
	
OH
(iii) CH3 – CH2 – CH – CH2 – CH3	
CH3 – CH2 – CH – CH2– CH3	
Pentan-3-ol
	
           |	
	
|
	
	
	
OH
	
CH3	
	
CH3	
3-Methyl- 
	
|	
	
|	
butan-1-ol
(iv)	CH3 – CH – CH2 – CH2 –	
CH3 – CH – CH2 – CH2– OH
	
 CH3	
	
CH3	
              2-Methyl- 
	
 |	
	
|	
butan-1-ol
(v)	 CH3 – CH2 – CH – CH2 –	
CH3 – CH2 – CH – CH2– OH
   	
CH3	
CH3	
2-Methyl- 
	
|	
|	
butan-2-ol
(vi)	CH3 – C – CH2 – CH3	
CH3 – C – CH2 – CH3
	
|	
	
|
	
	
	
OH
	
CH3	
	
CH3	
2,2- Dimethyl- 
	
|	
	
|	
propan-1-ol
(vii) CH3 – C – CH2 –	
CH3 – C – CH2OH
                 |	
	
|
	
  CH3	
 	
CH3
	
CH3	
	
CH3  	OH	
3-Methyl-	
          	
|       |       	
	
|	
|  
 
 
 
 
 
 
b u t a n - 2 - o l 
(viii) CH3 – CH – CH –CH3	
CH3 – CH – CH –CH3
	
	
	
	
   
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 5 :
 299
Hydrocarbons
Remarks
Lowest sum and
alphabetical 
arrangement
Lowest sum and 
alphabetical
arrangement
sec is not considered
while arranging
alphabetically; 
isopropyl is taken 
as one word
Further numbering 
to the substituents
of the side chain
Alphabetical 
priority order
Table 9.1  Nomenclature of a Few Organic Compounds
important to write the correct structure 
from the given IUPAC name. To do this, first 
of all, the longest chain of carbon atoms 
corresponding to the parent alkane is written. 
Then after numbering it, the substituents are 
attached to the correct carbon atoms and 
finally valence of each carbon atom is satisfied 
by putting the correct number of hydrogen 
atoms. This can be clarified by writing the 
structure of 3-ethyl-2, 2–dimethylpentane in 
the following steps :
i)	 Draw the chain of five carbon atoms:  
C – C – C – C – C
ii)	 Give number to carbon atoms:  
C
1– C
2– C
3– C
4– C
5
Structure and IUPAC Name	
	
	
 
(a)	
1CH3–
2CH – 
3CH2 – 
4CH – 
5CH2 – 
6CH3   	
  
	
(4 – Ethyl – 2 – methylhexane)	
        	
	
	
            
(b)  
	 8CH3 –
 7CH2 –
 6CH2 –
 5CH –
 4CH –
    3C   –
 2CH2 –
 1CH3   	
	
	
	  
	
	
	
	
(3,3-Diethyl-5-isopropyl-4-methyloctane)	
	
  
	
(c)	
1CH3–
2CH2–
3CH2–
4CH–
5CH–
6CH2–
7CH2–
8CH2–
9CH2–
10CH3      
	
	
5-sec– Butyl-4-isopropyldecane
(d)	
1CH3–
2CH2–
3CH2–
4CH2–
5CH–
6CH2–
7CH2–
8CH2–
9CH3
	
	
5-(2,2– Dimethylpropyl)nonane
(e)	
1CH3 –
 2CH2 –
 3CH –
 4CH2 –
 5CH –
 6CH2 –
 7CH3	
	
	
	
	
	
3–Ethyl–5–methylheptane
Problem 9.3
Write IUPAC names of the following 
compounds :
(i)	 (CH3)3 C CH2C(CH3)3	
(ii)	 (CH3)2 C(C2H5)2
(iii)	tetra – tert-butylmethane
Solution
(i)	 2, 2, 4, 4-Tetramethylpentane	
(ii)	 3, 3-Dimethylpentane
(iii)	3,3-Di-tert-butyl -2, 2, 4, 4 -  
	
tetramethylpentane
	
If it is important to write the correct 
IUPAC name for a given structure, it is equally 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 6 :
 300
chemistry
iii)	 Attach ethyl group at carbon 3 and two 
methyl groups at carbon 2
	
        
	
C
1 – 
2C – 
3C – 
4C – 
5C 
	
        
iv)	 Satisfy the valence of each carbon atom 
by putting requisite number of hydrogen 
atoms :
	
	
   
	
CH3  –  C  –   CH – CH2 – CH3
	
	
   
	  
	
Thus we arrive at the correct structure. 
If you have understood writing of structure 
from the given name, attempt the following 
problems.
Problem 9.4
Write structural formulas of the following 
compounds :
(i)	 3, 4, 4, 5–Tetramethylheptane	
(ii)	 2,5-Dimethyhexane
Solution
	
   
(i)	 CH3 – CH2 – CH  –  C  –    CH– CH – 
CH3
	
 	
   
	
 
	
   
(ii)	 CH3 – CH – CH2 – CH2 – CH – CH3
Problem 9.5
Write structures for each of the 
following compounds. Why are the given 
names incorrect? Write correct IUPAC  
names.
(i)	 2-Ethylpentane 
(ii)	 5-Ethyl – 3-methylheptane
Solution
(i)	 CH3 – CH – CH2– CH2 – CH3 	
Longest chain is of six carbon atoms and 
not that of five. Hence, correct name is  
3-Methylhexane.
	
 7	
6	
5	
4	
 3	
2	
1
(ii)	 CH3 – CH2 – CH – CH2 – CH – CH2 – CH3
	
  
	
 
Numbering is to be started from the 
end which gives lower number to ethyl 
group. Hence, correct name is 3-ethyl-5-
methylheptane.
9.2.2	
Preparation
Petroleum and natural gas are the main 
sources of alkanes. However, alkanes can be 
prepared by following methods :
1. From unsaturated hydrocarbons
Dihydrogen gas adds to alkenes and alkynes 
in the presence of finely divided catalysts like 
platinum, palladium or nickel to form alkanes. 
This process is called hydrogenation. These 
metals adsorb dihydrogen gas on their 
surfaces and activate the hydrogen – hydrogen 
bond. Platinum and palladium catalyse the 
reaction at room temperature but relatively 
higher temperature and pressure are required 
with nickel catalysts.
CH2 =CH2 + H2 
Pt/Pd/Ni
 CH3−CH3 
Ethene
Propane   (9.1)
 
CH2–CH=CH2 + H2 
Pt/Pd/Ni
 CH3−CH2CH3 
Propane
Propane
(9.2)
 
CH3–C≡ C–H + 2H 
Pt/Pd/Ni
 CH3−CH2CH3 
Propyne
Propane
(9.3)
2. From alkyl halides
i)	 Alkyl halides (except fluorides) on reduction 
with zinc and dilute hydrochloric acid give 
alkanes. 
CH–C1+H2 
Zn,H
+
 CH4+HC1   (9.4)
Chloromethane	
Methane
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 7 :
 301
Hydrocarbons
C2H5–C1+H2 
Zn,H
+
 C2H6+HC1
Chloroethane                    Ethane           (9.5)
CH3CH2CH2C1 + H2 Zn,H
+
 CH3CH2CH3+CH1
1-Chloropropane                     Propane
(9.6)
ii)	 Alkyl halides on treatment with sodium 
metal in dry ethereal (free from moisture) 
solution give higher alkanes. This reaction 
is known as Wurtz reaction and is used 
for the preparation of higher alkanes 
containing even number of carbon  
atoms.
CH3Br+2Na+BrCH3 
dry ether  CH3+2Na
Bromomenthane	
	
Ethane
(9.7)
C2H5Br+2Na+BrC2H5 
dry ether  C2H5–C2H
Bromoethane		
	
     n–Butane
(9.8)
What will happen if two different alkyl halides 
are taken?
3. From carboxylic acids
i)	 Sodium salts of carboxylic acids on 
heating with soda lime (mixture of sodium 
hydroxide and calcium oxide) give alkanes 
containing one carbon atom less than the 
carboxylic acid. This process of elimination 
of carbon dioxide from a carboxylic acid is 
known as decarboxylation.
	
CH3COO
– Na
++NaOH 
∆
CaO  CH4+Na2CO3
	
Sodium ethanoate
Problem 9.6
Sodium salt of which acid will be needed 
for the preparation of propane ? Write 
chemical equation for the reaction.
Solution
Butanoic acid, 
CH3CH2CH2COO
–Na
++ NaOH
CaO
	
	
	
	
CH3CH2CH3+Na2CO3
ii)	 Kolbe’s electrolytic method: An aqueous 
solution of sodium or potassium salt of 
a carboxylic acid on electrolysis gives 
alkane containing even number of 
carbon atoms at the anode.	
+
3
2
3
3
2
2
Electrolysts
2CH COO Na
2H O
Sodium acetate
CH
CH
2CO
H
2NaOH
−
+
↓
−
+
+
+
	
	
	
	
(9.9)
	
The reaction is supposed to follow the 
following path :
	
O
	
i)	 2CH3COO
–Na
+ 
 2CH3 – C – O
–+2Na
+
ii)	 At anode:
	
O	
O
	
	
2CH3 –C–O
– –02e
–  2CH3 – C – 
 
 2C.    H3+2CO2↑
Acetate ion	
	
Acetate         Methyl free  
                                free radical     radical
iii)	 H3C + CH3 
 H3C–CH3↑
iv)	 At cathode :
	
H2O+e
–→–OH+
2 →H2↑
	
Methane cannot be prepared by this 
method. Why?
9.2.3	
Properties
Physical properties
Alkanes are almost non-polar molecules 
because of the covalent nature of C-C and 
C-H bonds and due to very little difference 
of electronegativity between carbon and 
hydrogen atoms. They possess weak van der 
Waals forces. Due to the weak forces, the first 
four members, C1 to C4 are gases, C5 to C17 
are liquids and those containing 18 carbon 
atoms or more are solids at 298 K. They are 
colourless and odourless. What do you think 
about solubility of alkanes in water based 
upon non-polar nature of alkanes? Petrol 
is a mixture of hydrocarbons and is used 
as a fuel for automobiles. Petrol and lower 
fractions of petroleum are also used for  dry 
cleaning of clothes to remove grease stains. 
On the basis of this observation, what do 
you think about the nature of the greasy 
substance? You are correct if you say that 
grease (mixture of higher alkanes) is non-
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 8 :
 302
chemistry
polar and, hence, hydrophobic  in nature. It is 
generally observed that in relation to solubility 
of substances in solvents, polar substances 
are soluble in polar solvents, whereas the 
non-polar ones in non-polar solvents i.e., like 
dissolves like.
	
Boiling point (b.p.) of different alkanes are 
given in Table 9.2 from which it is clear that 
there is a steady increase in boiling point with 
increase in molecular mass. This is due to the 
fact that the intermolecular van der Waals 
forces increase with increase of the molecular 
size or the surface area of the molecule. 
	
You can make an interesting observation 
by having a look on the boiling points of  
three isomeric pentanes viz., (pentane,  
2-methylbutane and 2,2-dimethylpropane). It 
is observed (Table 9.2) that pentane having 
a continuous chain of five carbon atoms has 
the highest boiling point (309.1K) whereas  
2,2 – dimethylpropane boils at 282.5K. With 
increase in number of branched chains, 
the molecule attains the shape of a sphere. 
This results in smaller area of contact and 
therefore weak intermolecular forces between 
spherical molecules, which are overcome at 
relatively lower temperatures. 
Chemical properties
As already mentioned, alkanes are generally 
inert towards acids, bases, oxidising and 
reducing agents. However, they undergo 
the following reactions under certain  
conditions.
1. Substitution reactions
One or more hydrogen atoms of alkanes 
can be replaced by halogens, nitro group 
and sulphonic acid group. Halogenation 
takes place either at higher temperature  
(573-773 K) or in the presence of diffused 
sunlight or ultraviolet light. Lower alkanes 
do not undergo nitration and sulphonation 
reactions. These reactions in which hydrogen 
atoms of alkanes are substituted are known 
as substitution reactions. As an example, 
chlorination of methane is given below:
Halogenation
CH2 + C1 hv
     CH3C1	
+	
HC1
	
Chloromethane	
(9.10)
CH3C1  +  hv
 CH2 C12	
+	
HC1
	
Dichloromethane	
(9.11)
CH2C12  
hv
  CHC13	
+	
HC1
	
Trichloromethane	
(9.12)
CHC13  +  C12  hv
  CC14	 +	
HC1
	
Tetrachloromethane	(9.13)
Table 9.2 Variation of Melting Point and Boiling Point in Alkanes
Molecular 	
Name	
Molecular	
b.p./(K)	
m.p./(K)
formula	
	
mass/u	
	
CH4	
Methane	
16	
111.0	
90.5
C2H6	
Ethane	
30	
184.4	
101.0
C3H8	
Propane	
44	
230.9	
85.3
C4H10	
Butane	
58	
272.4	
134.6
C4H10	
2-Methylpropane	
58	
261.0	
114.7
C5H12	
Pentane	
72	
309.1	
143.3
C5H12	
2-Methylbutane	
72	
300.9	
113.1
C5H12	
2,2-Dimethylpropane	
72	
282.5	
256.4
C6H14	
Hexane	
86	
341.9	
178.5
C7H16	
Heptane	
100	
371.4	
182.4
C8H18	
Octane	
114	
398.7	
216.2
C9H20	
Nonane	
128	
423.8	
222.0
C10H22	
Decane	
142	
447.1	
243.3
C20H42	
Eicosane	
282	
615.0	
236.2
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 9 :
 303
Hydrocarbons
CH3–CH3  +  C12  
hv
  CH3–CH2C1   +   HC1
	
Chloroethane	
(9.14)
	
It is found that the rate of reaction of 
alkanes with halogens is F2 > Cl2 > Br2 > I2. 
Rate of replacement of hydrogens of alkanes is :  
3° > 2° > 1°. Fluorination is too violent to 
be controlled. Iodination is very slow and a 
reversible reaction. It can be carried out in the 
presence of oxidizing agents like HIO3 or HNO3.
CH4+I2 
 CH3I+HI
(9.15)
HIO3+5HI→312+3H2O
(9.16)
	
Halogenation is supposed to proceed via 
free radical chain mechanism involving three 
steps namely initiation, propagation and 
termination as given below:
Mechanism 
(i)	 Initiation : The reaction is initiated 
by homolysis of chlorine molecule in the 
presence of light or heat. The Cl–Cl bond 
is weaker than the C–C and C–H bond and 
hence, is easiest to break.
C1–C1   
hv
homolysis  C.
   H3	+	
C1
	
	
	
Chlorine free radicals
(ii)	Propagation : Chlorine free radical 
attacks the methane molecule and takes the 
reaction in the forward direction by breaking 
the C-H bond to generate methyl free radical 
with the formation of H-Cl.
(a) CH4 +  C
+ 1  
hv
 C
+  H3 + H–C1
	
The methyl radical thus obtained attacks 
the second molecule of chlorine to form  
CH3 – Cl with the liberation of another chlorine 
free radical by homolysis of chlorine molecule.
(b) CH3 +  C1–C1 
hv
 CH3 – C1 + C1
	
The chlorine and methyl free radicals 
generated above repeat steps (a) and (b) 
respectively and thereby setup a chain of 
reactions. The propagation steps (a) and 
(b) are those which directly give principal 
products, but many other propagation 
steps are possible and may occur. Two such 
steps given below explain how more highly 
haloginated products are formed.
CH3C1 + C.   1 → C.   H2C1 + HC1
C.   H2C1 + C1– C1 → CH2C12  + C.   1
(iii)	
 Termination: The reaction stops after 
some time due to consumption of reactants  
and / or due to the following side reactions :
	
The possible chain terminating steps are:
(a)	 C.   1 + C.   1 → C1–C1
(b)	 H3 C.    + C.    H3 → H3C– CH3
(c)	 H3 C.   1  +  C.   1  →  H3C–C1
	
Though in (c), CH3 – Cl,  the one of the 
products is formed but free radicals are 
consumed and the chain is terminated. The 
above mechanism helps us to understand 
the reason for the formation of ethane as a 
byproduct during chlorination of methane. 
2. Combustion 
Alkanes on heating in the presence of air or 
dioxygen are completely oxidized to carbon 
dioxide and water with the evolution of large 
amount of heat.
4
2
2
2
è
-1
c
4
10
2
2
2
è
-1
c
CH (g)
20 (g)
CO (g)
2H O(1);
Ä H
890kJmol
(9.17)
C H (g)
13/2O (g)
4CO (g)
5H O(1)
Ä H
2875.84kJmol
(9.18)
+
→
+
−
+
→
+
= −
      	
	
The general combustion equation for any 
alkane is :
n
2n+2
2
2
2
3n
1
C H
O
nCO
(n
1)H O
2
+


+
→
+
+




	
(9.19)
	
Due to the evolution of large amount of 
heat during combustion, alkanes are used as 
fuels.
During incomplete combustion of alkanes 
with insufficient amount of air or dioxygen, 
carbon black is formed which is used in 
the manufacture of ink, printer ink, black 
pigments and as filters.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 10 :
 304
chemistry
CH4(g) + O2(g) 
incomplete
combustion  C(s)+2H2 O(1)
	
(9.20)
3. Controlled oxidation
Alkanes on heating with a regulated supply 
of dioxygen or air at high pressure and in the 
presence of suitable catalysts give a variety of 
oxidation products.
(i)	 2CH4 + O2 
Cu/523K/100atm  2CH3 OH

Methanol
(9.21)
(ii)	 CH4 + O2 
Mo2O3
∆
 HCHO  +  H2O

Methanal
(9.22)
(iii)	2CH3CH3 + 3O2 (CH3COO)Mn
∆
 2CH3COOH

Ethanoic acid

+  2H2O
(9.23)
(iv)	Ordinarily alkanes resist oxidation but 
alkanes having tertiary H atom can be 
oxidized to corresponding alcohols by 
potassium permanganate.
 
(iCH3)3 CH 
KMnO4
Oxidation  (CH3)3 COH
2-Methylpropane
2-Methylpropane-2-01
(9.24)
4. Isomerisation 
n-Alkanes on heating in the presence of 
anhydrous aluminium chloride and hydrogen 
chloride gas isomerise to branched chain 
alkanes. Major products are given below. 
Some minor products are also possible which 
you can think over. Minor products are 
generally not reported in organic reactions.
CH3(CH)2)4CH3
Anhy, AICI3/ HCI   
n-Hexane 
CH3CH–(CH2)2–CH3+CH3CH2–CH–CH2–CH3
	
	
	
CH3	
CH3
2-Methylpentane	
3-Methylpenatone
(9.25)
5. Aromatization 
n-Alkanes having six or more carbon atoms 
on heating to 773K at 10-20 atmospheric 
pressure in the presence of oxides of vanadium, 
molybdenum or chromium supported over 
alumina get dehydrogenated and cyclised to 
benzene and its homologues. This reaction is 
known as aromatization or reforming.
(9.26)
	
Toluene (C7H8) is methyl derivative of 
benzene. Which alkane do you suggest for 
preparation of toluene ?
6. Reaction with steam  
Methane reacts with steam at 1273 K in the 
presence of nickel catalyst to form carbon 
monoxide and dihydrogen. This method is 
used for industrial preparation of dihydrogen 
gas
CH4  +  H2IO 
Ni
∆
 CO  +  3H2
(9.27)
7. Pyrolysis 
Higher alkanes on heating to higher 
temperature decompose into lower alkanes, 
alkenes etc. Such a decomposition reaction 
into smaller fragments by the application of 
heat is called pyrolysis or cracking.
(9.28)
	
Pyrolysis of alkanes is believed to be a 
free radical reaction. Preparation of oil gas 
or petrol gas from kerosene oil or petrol 
involves the principle of pyrolysis. For 
example, dodecane, a constituent of kerosene 
oil on heating to 973K in the presence of 
platinum, palladium or nickel gives a mixture 
of heptane and pentene.
C12H26 Pt/Pd/Ni
973K
 C7H16  +  C5H10 + Other 
Products
Dodecane	
Heptane	
Pentene
(9.29)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 11 :
 305
Hydrocarbons
9.2.4	
Conformations
Alkanes contain carbon-carbon sigma (σ) 
bonds. Electron distribution of the sigma 
molecular orbital is symmetrical around the 
internuclear axis of the C–C bond which is 
not disturbed due to rotation about its axis. 
This permits free rotation about C–C single 
bond. This rotation results into different 
spatial arrangements of atoms in space 
which can change into one another. Such 
spatial arrangements of atoms which can 
be converted into one another by rotation 
around a C-C single bond are called 
conformations or conformers or rotamers. 
Alkanes can thus have infinite number of 
conformations by rotation around C-C single 
bonds. However, it may be remembered that 
rotation around a C-C single bond is not 
completely free. It is hindered by a small 
energy barrier of 1-20 kJ mol
–1 due to weak 
repulsive interaction between the adjacent 
bonds. Such a type of repulsive interaction 
is called torsional strain.
	
Conformations of ethane : Ethane 
molecule (C2H6) contains a carbon – carbon 
single bond with each carbon atom attached 
to three hydrogen atoms.  Considering the 
ball and stick model of ethane, keep one 
carbon atom stationary and rotate the other 
carbon atom around the C-C axis. This 
rotation results into infinite number of spatial 
arrangements of hydrogen atoms attached to 
one carbon atom with respect to the hydrogen 
atoms attached to the other carbon atom. 
These are called conformational isomers 
(conformers). Thus there are infinite number 
of conformations of ethane. However, there are 
two extreme cases. One such conformation 
in which hydrogen atoms attached to two 
carbons are as closed together as possible is 
called eclipsed conformation and the other in 
which hydrogens are as far apart as possible 
is known as the staggered conformation. Any 
other intermediate conformation is called a 
skew conformation.It may be remembered 
that in all the conformations, the bond angles 
and the bond lengths remain the same. 
Eclipsed and the staggered conformations can 
be represented by Sawhorse and Newman 
projections.
1. Sawhorse projections 
In this projection, the molecule is viewed 
along the molecular axis. It is then projected 
on paper by drawing the central C–C bond 
as a somewhat longer straight line. Upper 
end of the line is  slightly tilted towards 
right or left hand side. The front carbon is 
shown at the lower end of the line, whereas 
the rear carbon is shown at the upper end. 
Each carbon has three lines attached to it 
corresponding to three hydrogen atoms. 
The lines are inclined at an angle of 120° to 
each other. Sawhorse projections of eclipsed 
and staggered conformations of ethane are 
depicted in Fig. 9.2.
2. Newman projections 
In this projection, the molecule is viewed at the 
C–C bond head on. The carbon atom nearer 
to the eye is represented by a point. Three 
hydrogen atoms attached to the front carbon 
atom are shown by three lines drawn at an 
angle of 120° to each other. The rear carbon 
atom (the carbon atom away from the eye) is 
represented by a circle and the three hydrogen 
atoms are shown attached to it by the shorter 
lines drawn at an angle of 120° to each other. 
The Newman’s projections are depicted in  
Fig. 9.3.
Fig. 9.2  Sawhorse projections of ethane
Fig. 9.3  Newman’s projections of ethane
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 12 :
 306
chemistry
Fig. 9.4	
Orbital picture of ethene depicting  
σ bonds only
Relative stability of conformations: As 
mentioned earlier, in staggered form of ethane, 
the electron clouds of carbon-hydrogen bonds 
are as far apart as possible. Thus, there are 
minimum repulsive forces, minimum energy 
and maximum stability of the molecule. On the 
other hand, when the staggered form changes 
into the eclipsed form, the electron clouds of the 
carbon – hydrogen bonds come closer to each 
other resulting in increase in electron cloud 
repulsions. To check the increased repulsive 
forces, molecule will have to possess more 
energy and thus has lesser stability. As already 
mentioned, the repulsive interaction between 
the electron clouds, which affects stability of 
a conformation, is called torsional strain. 
Magnitude of torsional strain depends upon 
the angle of rotation about C–C bond. This 
angle is also called dihedral angle or torsional 
angle. Of all the conformations of ethane, the 
staggered form has the least torsional strain 
and the eclipsed form, the maximum torsional 
strain. Therefore, staggered conformation is 
more stable than the eclipsed conformation. 
Hence, molecule largely remains in staggered 
conformation or we can say that it is preferred 
conformation. Thus it may be inferred that 
rotation around C–C bond in ethane is not 
completely free.  The energy difference between 
the two extreme forms is of the order of 12.5 
kJ mol
–1, which is very small. Even at ordinary 
temperatures, the ethane molecule gains 
thermal or kinetic energy sufficient enough to 
overcome this energy barrier of 12.5 kJ mol
–1 
through intermolecular collisions. Thus, it 
can be said that rotation about carbon-carbon 
single bond in ethane is almost free for all 
practical purposes. It has not been possible to 
separate and isolate different conformational 
isomers of ethane.
9.3	 Alkenes
Alkenes are unsaturated hydrocarbons 
containing at least one double bond. What 
should be the general formula of alkenes? If 
there is one double bond between two carbon 
atoms in alkenes, they must possess two 
hydrogen atoms less than alkanes. Hence, 
general formula for alkenes is CnH2n. Alkenes 
are also known as olefins (oil forming) since 
the first member, ethylene or ethene (C2H4) 
was found to form an oily liquid on reaction 
with chlorine.
9.3.1	
Structure of Double Bond
Carbon-carbon double bond in alkenes 
consists of one strong sigma (σ) bond (bond 
enthalpy about 397 kJ mol
–1) due to head-on 
overlapping of sp
2 hybridised orbitals and 
one weak pi (π) bond (bond enthalpy about 
284 kJ mol
–1) obtained by lateral or sideways 
overlapping of the two 2p orbitals of the two 
carbon atoms. The double bond is shorter in 
bond length (134 pm) than the C–C single 
bond (154 pm). You have already read that 
the pi (π) bond is a weaker bond due to poor 
sideways overlapping between the two 2p 
orbitals. Thus, the presence of the pi (π) bond 
makes alkenes behave as sources of loosely 
held mobile electrons. Therefore, alkenes are 
easily attacked by reagents or compounds 
which are in search of electrons. Such 
reagents are called electrophilic reagents. 
The presence of weaker π-bond makes alkenes 
unstable molecules in comparison to alkanes 
and thus, alkenes can be changed into single 
bond compounds by combining with the 
electrophilic reagents. Strength of the double 
bond (bond enthalpy, 681 kJ mol
–1) is greater 
than that of a carbon-carbon single bond in 
ethane (bond enthalpy, 348 kJ mol
–1). Orbital 
diagrams of ethene molecule are shown in  
Figs. 9.4 and 9.5.
9.3.2	
Nomenclature
For nomenclature of alkenes in IUPAC system, 
the longest chain of carbon atoms containing 
the double bond is selected. Numbering of the 
chain is done from the end which is nearer to 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 13 :
 307
Hydrocarbons
the double bond. The suffix ‘ene’ replaces ‘ane’ 
of alkanes. It may be remembered that  first 
member of alkene series is: CH2 (replacing 
n by 1 in CnH2n) known as methene but has 
a very short life. As already mentioned, first 
stable member of alkene series is C2H4 known 
as ethylene (common) or ethene (IUPAC). 
IUPAC names of a few members of alkenes 
are given below :
Structure	
IUPAC name
CH3 – CH = CH2	
Propene
CH3 – CH2 – CH = CH2	 But – l - ene
CH3 – CH = CH–CH3	
But-2-ene
CH2 = CH – CH = CH2	 Buta – 1,3 - diene
CH2 = C – CH3	
2-Methylprop-1-ene
          |
          CH3
CH2 = CH – CH – CH3	 3-Methylbut-1-ene
	
         |
	
         CH3
Problem  9.7
Write IUPAC names of the following 
compounds:
(i)	 (CH3)2CH – CH =  CH – CH2 – CH 
	
	
 
 
  
	
	
  CH3 – CH – CH 
	
	
	
     | 
	
	
	
     C2H5
(ii)
(iii)	CH2 = C (CH2CH2CH3)2
(iv)	CH3 CH2 CH2 CH2	
CH2CH3
	
|	
|
	
    CH3 – CHCH = C – CH2 – CHCH3
	
  |
	
  CH3
Solution
(i)	 2,8-Dimethyl-3, 6-decadiene;
(ii)	 1,3,5,7 Octatetraene;	
(iii)	2-n-Propylpent-1-ene;
(iv)	4-Ethyl-2,6-dimethyl-dec-4-ene;
Problem 9.8
Calculate number of sigma (σ) and pi (π) 
bonds in the above structures (i-iv).
Solution
σ bonds : 33, π bonds : 2
σ bonds : 17, π bonds : 4
σ bonds : 23, π bond : 1
σ bonds : 41, π bond : 1
9.3.3 Isomerism 
Alkenes show both structural isomerism and 
geometrical isomerism.
Structural isomerism : As in alkanes, ethene 
(C2H4) and propene (C3H6) can have only one 
structure but alkenes higher than propene 
have different structures. Alkenes possessing 
C4H8 as molecular formula can be written in 
the following three ways:
I.	 1	
2	
3	
4
	
CH2 = CH – CH2 – CH3	
	
But-1-ene
	
(C4H8)	
	
	
II.	 1	
 2	
 3	
 4
	
CH3 – CH = CH – CH3	
	
But-2-ene
	
(C4H8)
Fig. 9.5	
Orbital picture of ethene showing formation of (a) π-bond, (b) π-cloud and (c) bond angles and 
bond lengths 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 14 :
 308
chemistry
III.	
1	
2	
3
	
CH2 = C – CH3
	
|
	
CH3
	
2-Methylprop-1-ene
	
(C4H8)
	
Structures I and III, and II and III are 
the examples of chain isomerism whereas 
structures I and II are position isomers.
Problem 9.9
Write structures and IUPAC names of 
different structural isomers of alkenes 
corresponding to C5H10.
Solution
(a)	 CH2 = CH – CH2 – CH2 – CH3	
	
Pent-1-ene
(b)	 CH3 – CH=CH  – CH2 – CH3
	
Pent-2-ene
(c)	 CH3 – C = CH – CH3
	
|
	
CH3
	
2-Methylbut-2-ene
(d)	 CH3 – CH – CH = CH2
	
|
	
CH3
	
3-Methylbut-1-ene
(e)	 CH2 = C – CH2 – CH3
	
|
	
CH3	
	
2-Methylbut-1-ene	
Geometrical isomerism: Doubly bonded 
carbon atoms have to satisfy the remaining 
two valences by joining with two atoms or 
groups. If the two atoms or groups attached 
to each carbon atom are different, they can 
be represented by YX C = C XY like structure.  
YX C = C XY can be represented in space in 
the following two ways :
	
In (a), the two identical atoms i.e., both 
the X or both the Y lie on the same side 
of the double bond but in (b) the two X or 
two Y lie across the double bond or on the 
opposite sides of the double bond. This 
results in different geometry of (a) and (b) i.e. 
disposition of atoms or groups in space in 
the two arrangements is different. Therefore, 
they are stereoisomers. They would have the 
same geometry if atoms or groups around 
C=C bond can be rotated but rotation around 
C=C bond is not free. It is restricted. For 
understanding this concept, take two pieces 
of strong cardboards and join them with the 
help of two nails. Hold one cardboard in your 
one hand and try to rotate the other. Can 
you really rotate the other cardboard ? The 
answer is no. The rotation is restricted. This 
illustrates that the restricted rotation of atoms 
or groups around the doubly bonded carbon 
atoms gives rise to different geometries of 
such compounds. The stereoisomers of this 
type are called geometrical isomers. The 
isomer of the type (a), in which two identical 
atoms or groups lie on the same side of the 
double bond is called cis  isomer and the 
other isomer of the type (b), in which identical 
atoms or groups lie on the opposite sides of 
the double bond is called trans isomer . Thus 
cis and trans isomers have the same structure 
but have different configuration (arrangement 
of atoms or groups in space). Due to different 
arrangement of atoms or groups in space, 
these isomers differ in their properties like 
melting point, boiling point, dipole moment, 
solubility etc. Geometrical or cis-trans isomers 
of but-2-ene are represented below :
	
Cis form of alkene is found to be more 
polar than the trans form. For example, 
dipole moment of cis-but-2-ene is 0.33 Debye, 
whereas, dipole moment of the trans form  
is almost zero or it can be said that  
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 15 :
 309
Hydrocarbons
trans-but-2-ene is non-polar. This can be 
understood by drawing geometries of the two 
forms as given below from which it is clear 
that in the trans-but-2-ene, the two methyl 
groups are in opposite directions, Threfore, 
dipole moments of C-CH3 bonds cancel, thus 
making the trans form non-polar. 
(ii)	 CH2 = CBr2
(iii) C6H5CH = CH – CH3
(iv)	CH3CH = CCl CH3
Solution
(iii) and (iv). In structures (i) and (ii), two 
identical groups are attached to one of 
the doubly bonded carbon atom.
9.3.4	
Preparation 
1.	 From alkynes: Alkynes on partial 
reduction with calculated amount of 
dihydrogen in the presence of palladised 
charcoal partially deactivated with poisons 
like sulphur compounds or quinoline give 
alkenes. Partially deactivated palladised 
charcoal is known as Lindlar’s catalyst. 
Alkenes thus obtained are having cis 
geometry. However, alkynes on reduction 
with sodium in liquid ammonia form trans 
alkenes.
(9.30)
(9.31)
iii)	 CH≡ CH+H2 
Pd/C  CH2 =CH2     (9.32)
	
Ethyne	
Ethene
iv)	 CH3–C≡ CH+H2 
Pd/C  CH3–CH =CH2
	
Propyne	
Propene
(9.33)
	
Will propene thus obtained show 
geometrical isomerism? Think for the 
reason in support of your answer.
2.	 From alkyl halides: Alkyl halides (R-X) on 
heating with alcoholic potash (potassium 
hydroxide dissolved in alcohol, say, 
	
In the case of solids, it is observed that the 
trans isomer has higher melting point than 
the cis form. 
	
Geometrical or cis-trans isomerism  
is also shown by alkenes of the types  
XYC = CXZ  and XYC = CZW
Problem 9.10
Draw cis and trans isomers of the 
following compounds. Also write their 
IUPAC names :
(i)	 CHCl = CHCl
(ii)	 C2H5CCH3 = CCH3C2H5
Solution
Problem 9.11
Which of the following compounds will 
show cis-trans isomerism?
(i)	 (CH3)2C = CH – C2H5	 	
cis-But-2-ene
(µ = 0.33D)
trans-But-2-ene
(µ = 0)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 16 :
 310
chemistry
ethanol) eliminate one molecule of halogen 
acid to form alkenes. This reaction is 
known as dehydrohalogenation i.e., 
removal of halogen acid. This is example 
of β-elimination reaction, since hydrogen 
atom is eliminated from the β carbon atom 
(carbon atom next to the carbon to which 
halogen is attached). 
(9.34)
	
Nature of halogen atom and the alkyl group 
determine rate of the reaction. It is observed 
that for halogens, the rate is: iodine > 
bromine > chlorine, while for alkyl groups 
it is : tertiary > secondary > primary. 
3.	 From vicinal dihalides: Dihalides in 
which two halogen atoms are attached 
to  two adjacent carbon atoms are known 
as vicinal dihalides. Vicinal dihalides on 
treatment with zinc metal lose a molecule 
of ZnX2 to form an alkene. This reaction 
is known  as dehalogenation.
CH2Br–CH2Br + Zn 
 CH2=CH2+ ZnBr2
(9.35)
CH3CHBr–CH2Br + Zn 
 CH3CH=CH2
	
	
+ZnBr2
(9.36)
4.	 From alcohols by acidic dehydration: 
You have read during nomenclature of 
different homologous series in Unit 12 
that alcohols are the hydroxy derivatives 
of alkanes. They are represented by R–OH 
where, R is CnH2n+1. Alcohols on heating 
with concentrated sulphuric acid form 
alkenes with the elimination of one water 
molecule. Since a water molecule is 
eliminated from the alcohol molecule in 
the presence of an acid, this reaction is 
known as acidic dehydration of alcohols. 
This reaction is also the example of  
β-elimination reaction since –OH group 
takes out one hydrogen atom from the  
β-carbon atom.
(9.37)
9.3.5	
Properties
Physical properties
Alkenes as a class resemble alkanes in 
physical properties, except in types of 
isomerism and difference in polar nature. 
The first three members are gases, the next 
fourteen are liquids and the higher ones are 
solids. Ethene is a colourless gas with a faint 
sweet smell. All other alkenes are colourless 
and odourless, insoluble in water but fairly 
soluble in non-polar solvents like benzene, 
petroleum ether. They show a regular increase 
in boiling point with increase in size i.e., every 
– CH2 group added increases boiling point by 
20–30 K. Like alkanes, straight chain alkenes 
have higher boiling point than isomeric 
branched chain compounds.
Chemical properties
Alkenes are the rich source of loosely held  
pi (π) electrons, due to which they show 
addition reactions in which the electrophiles 
add on to the carbon-carbon double bond to 
form the addition products.  Some reagents 
also add by free radical mechanism. There 
are cases when under special conditions, 
alkenes also undergo free radical substitution 
reactions. Oxidation and ozonolysis reactions 
are also quite prominent in alkenes. A brief 
description of different reactions of alkenes 
is given  below:
1.	 Addition of dihydrogen: Alkenes add 
up one molecule of dihydrogen gas in 
the presence of finely divided nickel, 
palladium or platinum to form alkanes 
(Section 9.2.2)
2.	 Addition of halogens : Halogens like 
bromine or chlorine add up to alkene to 
form vicinal dihalides. However, iodine 
does not show addition reaction under 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 17 :
 311
Hydrocarbons
normal conditions. The reddish orange 
colour of bromine solution in carbon 
tetrachloride is discharged when bromine 
adds up to an unsaturation site. This 
reaction is used as a test for unsaturation. 
Addition of halogens to alkenes is an 
example of electrophilic addition reaction 
involving cyclic halonium ion formation 
which you will study in higher classes.
(9.38)
 
(9.39)
3.	 Addition of hydrogen halides: Hydrogen 
halides (HCl, HBr,HI) add up to alkenes 
to form alkyl halides. The order of 
reactivity of the hydrogen halides is  
HI > HBr > HCl. Like addition of halogens 
to alkenes, addition of hydrogen halides is 
also an example of electrophilic addition 
reaction. Let us illustrate this by taking 
addition of HBr to symmetrical and 
unsymmetrical alkenes 
Addition reaction of HBr to symmetrical 
alkenes
Addition reactions of HBr to symmetrical 
alkenes (similar groups attached to double 
bond) take place by electrophilic addition 
mechanism. 
CH2=CH2+H–Br 
 CH3–CH2–Br
(9.40)
CH3–CH=CH–CH3+HBr 
 CH3–CH–CHCH3
	
	
Br
(9.41)
Addition reaction of HBr to unsymmetrical 
alkenes (Markovnikov Rule)
How will H – Br add to propene ? The two 
possible products are I and II.
(9.42)
Markovnikov, a Russian chemist made a 
generalisation in 1869 after studying such 
reactions in detail. These generalisations 
led Markovnikov to frame a rule called 
Markovnikov rule. The rule states that 
negative part of the addendum (adding 
molecule) gets attached to that carbon atom 
which possesses lesser number of hydrogen 
atoms. Thus according to this rule, product 
I i.e., 2-bromopropane is expected. In actual 
practice, this is the principal product of the 
reaction. This generalisation of Markovnikov 
rule can be better understood in terms of 
mechanism of the reaction.
Mechanism 
Hydrogen bromide provides an electrophile, 
H
+, which attacks the double bond to form 
carbocation as shown below :
(i) 	 The secondary carbocation (b) is more 
stable than the primary carbocation 
(a), therefore, the former predominates 
because it is formed at a faster rate.
(ii) 	The carbocation (b) is attacked by Br
– ion 
to form the  product as follows :
2-Bromopropane 
(major product)
(a) less stable 
primary carbocation
(b) more stable
 secondary carbocation
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 18 :
 312
chemistry
Anti Markovnikov addition or peroxide 
effect or Kharash effect
In the presence of peroxide, addition of HBr 
to unsymmetrical alkenes like propene takes 
place contrary to the Markovnikov rule. This 
happens only with HBr but not with HCl 
and Hl. This addition reaction was observed  
by M.S. Kharash and F.R. Mayo in 1933 
at the University of Chicago. This reaction 
is known as peroxide or Kharash effect  
or addition reaction anti to Markovnikov  
rule.
CH3 – CH=CH2+HBr 
(C6H5CO)2O2
 CH3–CH2
	
CH2Br
1–Bromopropane
(9.43)
Mechanism : Peroxide effect proceeds via 
free radical chain mechanism as given below:
(ii)	 C.
   6H5+H–Br 
Homolysis
 C6H3+ B.
   r
	
The secondary free radical obtained in the 
above mechanism (step iii) is more stable than 
the primary. This explains the formation of  
1-bromopropane as the major product. It may 
be noted that the peroxide effect is not observed 
in addition of HCl and HI. This may be due  
to the fact that the H–Cl bond being  
stronger (430.5 kJ mol
–1) than H–Br bond  
(363.7 kJ mol
–1), is not cleaved by the  free 
radical, whereas the H–I bond is weaker  
(296.8 kJ mol
–1) and iodine free radicals 
combine to form iodine molecules instead of 
adding to the double bond. 
Problem 9.12
Write IUPAC names of the products 
obtained by addition reactions of HBr to  
hex-1-ene 
(i)	 in the absence of peroxide and	
 
(ii)	 in the presence of peroxide.
Solution
4.	 Addition of sulphuric acid : Cold 
concentrated sulphuric acid adds to 
alkenes in accordance with Markovnikov 
rule to form alkyl hydrogen sulphate by 
the electrophilic addition reaction.
(i)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 19 :
 313
Hydrocarbons
(9.44)
(9.45)
5.	 Addition of water : In the presence of a 
few drops of concentrated sulphuric acid 
alkenes react with water to form alcohols, 
in accordance with the Markovnikov rule.
(9.46)
6.	 Oxidation: Alkenes on reaction with cold, 
dilute, aqueous solution of potassium 
permanganate (Baeyer’s reagent) produce 
vicinal glycols. Decolorisation of KMnO4 
solution is used as a test for unsaturation.
(9.47)
(9.48)
b)	 Acidic potassium permanganate or acidic 
potassium dichromate oxidises alkenes to 
ketones and/or acids depending upon the 
nature of the alkene and the experimental 
conditions 
(9.49)
CH3 – CH=CH–CH3 
KMnO4/H
+
 2CH3COOH
But-2-ene
Ethanoic acid
(9.50)
7.	 Ozonolysis : Ozonolysis of alkenes 
involves the addition of ozone molecule to 
alkene to form ozonide, and then cleavage 
of the ozonide by Zn-H2O to smaller 
molecules. This reaction is highly useful 
in detecting the position of the double 
bond in alkenes or other unsaturated 
compounds. 
(9.51)
(9.52)
8.	 Polymerisation: You are familiar with 
polythene bags and polythene sheets. 
Polythene is obtained by the combination 
of large number of ethene molecules at 
high temperature, high pressure and 
in the presence of a catalyst. The large 
molecules thus obtained are called 
polymers. This reaction is known as 
polymerisation. The simple compounds 
from which polymers are made are called 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 20 :
 314
chemistry
monomers. Other alkenes also undergo 
polymerisation.
n(CH2 =CH2) 
High temp./pressure
Catalyst
 —(  CH2–CH2 )—
	
Polythene
(9.53)
n(CH3 –CH=CH2) 
High temp./pressure
Catalyst
 —(  CH–CH2 )—n
	
	
CH3
Polypropene
(9.54)	
Polymers are used for the manufacture of plastic 
bags, squeeze bottles, refrigerator dishes, toys, 
pipes, radio and T.V. cabinets etc. Polypropene 
is used for the manufacture of milk crates, 
plastic buckets and other moulded articles. 
Though these materials have now become 
common, excessive use of polythene and 
polypropylene is a matter of great concern for 
all of us.
9.4	 Alkynes
Like alkenes, alkynes are also unsaturated 
hydrocarbons. They contain at least one triple 
bond between two carbon atoms. The number 
of hydrogen atoms is still less in alkynes as 
compared to alkenes or alkanes. Their general 
formula is CnH2n–2. 
	
The first stable member of alkyne series 
is ethyne which is popularly known as 
acetylene. Acetylene is used for arc welding 
purposes in the form of oxyacetylene flame 
obtained by mixing acetylene with oxygen 
gas. Alkynes are starting materials for a large 
number of organic compounds. Hence, it 
is interesting to study this class of organic 
compounds.
9.4.1	
Nomenclature and Isomerism
In common system, alkynes are named as 
derivatives of acetylene. In IUPAC system, they 
are named as derivatives of the corresponding 
alkanes replacing ‘ane’ by the suffix ‘yne’. 
The position of the triple bond is indicated 
by the first triply bonded carbon. Common 
and IUPAC names of a few members of alkyne 
series are given in Table 9.2.
	
You have already learnt that ethyne and 
propyne have got only one structure but 
there are two possible structures for butyne –  
(i) but-1-yne and (ii) but-2-yne. Since these 
two compounds differ in their structures 
due to the position of the triple bond, they 
are known as position isomers. In how 
many ways, you can construct the structure 
for the next homologue i.e., the next alkyne 
with molecular formula  C5H8? Let us try to 
arrange five carbon atoms with a continuous 
chain and with a side chain. Following are the 
possible structures :
	
Structure	
IUPAC name
I. 	
	
1	
2	
3	
4	
5
HC≡ C–	CH2–	CH2–	CH3 	Pent–1-yne
II.	
	
1	
2	
3	
 4	
5
H3C–C≡	C–	 CH2–	CH3 	 Pent–2-yne
III.	
	
 4	 3	
2	
 1
H3C–CH–C≡	 CH
	
|
	
CH3
          3-Methyl but–1-yne
	
Structures I and II are position isomers 
and structures I and III or II and III are chain 
isomers.
Problem 9.13
Write structures of different isomers 
corresponding to the 5
th member of 
alkyne series. Also write IUPAC names of 
all the isomers. What type of isomerism 
is exhibited by different pairs of isomers?
Solution 
5
th member of alkyne has the molecular 
formula C6H10. The possible isomers are:
Table 9.2 Common and IUPAC Names of Alkynes (CnH2n–2)
	 Value of n	
Formula	
Structure	
Common name	
IUPAC name
	
2	
C2H2	
 H-C≡CH	
Acetylene	
Ethyne
	
3	
C3H4	
 CH3-C≡CH	
Methylacetylene	
Propyne
	
4	
C4H6	
 CH3CH2-C≡CH 	
Ethylacetylene	
But-1-yne
	
4	
C4H6	
 CH3-C≡C-CH3	
Dimethylacetylene 	
But-2-yne
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 21 :
 315
Hydrocarbons
(a)	 HC ≡ C – CH2 – CH2 – CH2 – CH3
	
Hex-1-yne
(b)	 CH3 – C ≡ C – CH2 – CH2 – CH3
	
Hex-2-yne
(c)	 CH3 – CH2 – C ≡ C – CH2– CH3
	
Hex-3-yne
	
	 3-Methylpent-1-yne
	
	 4-Methylpent-1-yne	
	
	 4-Methylpent-2-yne
	
	
    3,3-Dimethylbut-1-yne
Position and chain isomerism shown by 
different pairs.
9.4.2  Structure of Triple Bond	
Ethyne is the simplest molecule of alkyne 
series. Structure of ethyne is shown in  
Fig. 9.6.
	
Each carbon atom of ethyne has two sp 
hybridised orbitals. Carbon-carbon sigma (σ) 
bond is obtained by the head-on overlapping 
of the two sp hybridised orbitals of the two 
carbon atoms. The remaining sp hybridised 
orbital of each carbon atom undergoes 
overlapping along the internuclear axis with 
the 1s orbital of each of the two hydrogen 
atoms forming two C-H sigma bonds. 
H-C-C bond angle is of 180°. Each carbon 
has two unhybridised p orbitals which are 
perpendicular to each other as well as to the 
plane of the C-C sigma bond. The 2p orbitals 
of one carbon atom are parallel to the 2p 
orbitals of the other carbon atom, which 
undergo lateral or sideways overlapping to 
form two pi (π) bonds between two carbon 
atoms. Thus ethyne molecule consists of one 
C–C σ bond,  two C–H σ bonds and two C–C 
π bonds. The strength of C≡C bond (bond 
enthalpy 823 kJ mol
-1) is more than those 
of C=C bond (bond enthalpy 681 kJ mol
–1) 
and C–C bond (bond enthalpy 348 kJ mol
–1). 
The C≡C bond length is shorter (120 pm) 
than those of C=C (133 pm) and C–C (154 
pm). Electron cloud between two carbon 
atoms is cylindrically symmetrical about the 
internuclear axis. Thus, ethyne is a linear 
molecule.
9.4.3	
Preparation
1.	 From calcium carbide: On industrial 
scale, ethyne is prepared by treating 
calcium carbide with water. Calcium 
carbide is prepared by heating quick lime 
with coke. Quick lime can be obtained by 
heating limestone as shown in the following  
reactions:
CaCO3 
∆ CaO	
+	
O2 	
(9.55)
Fig. 9.6	
Orbital picture of ethyne showing  
(a) sigma overlaps (b) pi overlaps.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 22 :
 316
chemistry
CaO + 3C  
 CaC2	
+	
CO	
(9.56)
	
	
Calcium 
	
	
carbide
CaC2 + 2H2O  
 Ca(OH)2 + C2H2 	
(9.57)
2.	 From vicinal dihalides : Vicinal dihalides 
on treatment with alcoholic potassium 
hydroxide undergo dehydrohalogenation. 
One molecule of hydrogen halide is 
eliminated to form alkenyl halide which 
on treatment with sodamide gives alkyne.
9.4.4 	 Properties
Physical properties
Physical properties of alkynes follow the same 
trend of alkenes and alkanes. First three 
members are gases, the next eight are liquids 
and the higher ones are solids. All alkynes 
are colourless. Ethyene has characteristic 
odour. Other members are odourless. Alkynes 
are weakly polar in nature. They are lighter 
than water and immiscible with water but 
soluble in organic solvents like ethers, carbon 
tetrachloride and benzene. Their  melting 
point, boiling point and density increase with 
increase in molar mass.
Chemical properties
Alkynes show acidic nature, addition reactions 
and polymerisation reactions as follows : 
A.	 Acidic character of alkyne: Sodium 
metal and sodamide (NaNH2) are strong 
bases. They react with ethyne to form sodium 
acetylide with the liberation of dihydrogen 
gas. These reactions have not been observed 
in case of ethene and ethane thus indicating 
that ethyne is acidic in nature in comparison 
to ethene and ethane. Why is it so ? Has 
it something to do with their structures 
and the hybridisation ? You have read that 
hydrogen atoms in ethyne are attached to 
the sp hybridised carbon atoms whereas 
they are attached to sp
2 hybridised carbon 
atoms in ethene and sp
3 hybridised carbons 
in ethane. Due to the maximum percentage of 
s character (50%), the sp hybridised orbitals 
of carbon atoms in ethyne molecules have 
highest electronegativity; hence, these attract 
the shared electron pair of the C-H bond of 
ethyne to a greater extent than that of the 
sp
2 hybridised orbitals of carbon in ethene 
and the sp
3 hybridised orbital of carbon in 
ethane. Thus in ethyne, hydrogen atoms 
can be liberated as protons more easily as 
compared to ethene and ethane. Hence, 
hydrogen atoms of ethyne attached to triply 
bonded carbon atom are acidic in nature. You 
may note that the hydrogen atoms attached 
to the triply bonded carbons are acidic but 
not all the hydrogen atoms of alkynes. 
HC ≡ CH + Na → HC ≡ C
–Na
++ 1/2 H2
	
Monosodium
	
ethynide
(9.59)
HC ≡ C
– Na  + Na → Na
+ C
–Na
+ ≡ C
–Na
++ 1/2 H2
	
Disodium ethynide
(9.60)
CH3 – C ≡ C – H   +   Na
+ NH
–
2
	
↓
CH3 – C ≡ C
– Na
+  +   NH3
Sodium propynide
	
(9.61)
These reactions are not shown by alkenes 
and alkanes, hence used for distinction 
between alkynes, alkenes and alkanes. What 
about the above reactions with but-1-yne and 
but-2-yne ? Alkanes, alkenes and alkynes 
follow the following trend in their acidic 
behaviour :
i)	 CH ≡ CH > H2C – CH2 > CH3 –CH3
ii)	 HC ≡ CH > CH3 –C≡ CH >> CH3 –C≡C–CH3 
B.	 Addition reactions: Alkynes contain a 
triple bond, so they add up, two molecules of 
dihydrogen, halogen, hydrogen halides etc. 
Formation of the addition product takes place 
according to the following steps. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 23 :
 317
Hydrocarbons
 
	
The addition product formed depends 
upon stability of vinylic cation. Addition in 
unsymmetrical alkynes takes place according 
to Markovnikov rule. Majority of the reactions 
of alkynes are the examples of electrophilic 
addition reactions. A few addition reactions 
are given below:
(i)	
Addition of dihydrogen
HC≡CH+H2 Pt/Pd/Ni  [H2C = CH2] 
H2  CH3–CH3
(9.62)
CH3–C≡CH + H2 Pt/Pd/Ni  [CH3–CH=CH2]
	
Propyne	
Propene
 
↓H2
	
CH3–CH2–CH3
	
Propane
(9.63)
(ii)	 Addition of halogens
(9.64)
	
Reddish orange colour of the solution 
of bromine in carbon tetrachloride is 
decolourised. This is used as a test for 
unsaturation.
(iii)	 Addition of hydrogen halides
Two molecules of hydrogen halides (HCl, HBr, 
HI) add to alkynes to form gem dihalides (in 
which two halogens are attached to the same 
carbon atom)
H–C≡C–H+H–Br 
 [CH2 = CH–Br]→
 CHBr2
	
Bromoethene	
	
CH3
1,1-Dibromoethane
(9.65)
(9.66)
(iv)  Addition of water
Like alkanes and alkenes, alkynes are also 
immiscible and do not react with water. 
However, one molecule of water adds to 
alkynes on warming with mercuric sulphate 
and dilute sulphuric acid at 333 K to form 
carbonyl compounds.
(9.67)
(9.68)
(v)	Polymerisation
(a)	 Linear polymerisation: Under suitable 
conditions, linear polymerisation of ethyne 
takes place to produce polyacetylene or 
polyethyne which is a high molecular 
weight polyene containing repeating units of  
(CH = CH – CH =  CH ) and can be represented 
as —(CH = CH – CH = CH)n— Under special 
conditions, this polymer conducts electricity. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 24 :
 318
chemistry
Thin film of polyacetylene can be used as 
electrodes in batteries. These films are good 
conductors, lighter and cheaper than the 
metal conductors.
(b) 	Cyclic polymerisation: Ethyne on 
passing through red hot iron tube at 873K 
undergoes cyclic polymerization. Three 
molecules polymerise to form benzene, which 
is the starting molecule for the preparation of 
derivatives of benzene, dyes, drugs and large 
number of other organic compounds. This is 
the best route for entering from aliphatic to 
aromatic compounds as discussed below:
 
(9.69)
Problem 9.14
How will you convert ethanoic acid into 
benzene?
Solution
9.5 Aromatic Hydrocarbon
These hydrocarbons are also known as 
‘arenes’. Since most of them possess pleasant 
odour (Greek; aroma meaning pleasant 
smelling), the class of compounds was 
named as ‘aromatic compounds’. Most of such 
compounds were found to contain benzene 
ring. Benzene ring is highly unsaturated 
but in a majority of reactions of aromatic 
compounds, the unsaturation of benzene ring 
is retained. However, there are examples of 
aromatic hydrocarbons which do not contain a 
benzene ring but instead contain other highly 
unsaturated ring.  Aromatic compounds 
containing benzene ring are known as 
benzenoids and those not containing a 
benzene ring are known as non-benzenoids. 
Some examples of arenes are given  
below:
    Benzene	
        Toluene	
Naphthalene
Biphenyl
9.5.1 Nomenclature and Isomerism
The nomenclature and isomerism of aromatic 
hydrocarbons has already been discussed in 
Unit 8. All six hydrogen atoms in benzene 
are equivalent; so it forms one and only one 
type of monosubstituted product. When two 
hydrogen atoms in benzene are replaced by 
two similar or different monovalent atoms or 
groups, three different position isomers are 
possible. The 1, 2 or 1, 6 is known as the ortho 
(o–), the 1, 3 or 1, 5 as meta (m–) and the 1, 
4 as para (p–) disubstituted compounds. A 
few examples of derivatives of benzene are 
given below:
	
Methylbenzene	
1,2-Dimethylbenzene
	
(Toluene)	 	
(o-Xylene)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 25 :
 319
Hydrocarbons
1,3 Dimethylbenzene	 1,4-Dimethylbenzene
	
(m-Xylene)	
	
            ( p-Xylene)
9.5.2 Structure of Benzene
Benzene was isolated by Michael Faraday 
in 1825. The molecular formula of benzene, 
C6H6, indicates a high degree of unsaturation. 
This molecular formula did not account for 
its relationship to corresponding alkanes, 
alkenes and alkynes which you have studied 
in earlier sections of this unit. What do you 
think about its possible structure? Due to 
its unique properties and unusual stability, 
it took several years to assign its structure. 
Benzene was found to be a stable molecule 
and found to form a triozonide which indicates 
the presence of three double bonds. Benzene 
was further found to produce one and only one 
monosubstituted derivative which indicated 
that all the six carbon and six hydrogen atoms 
of benzene are identical. On the basis of this 
observation August Kekulé in 1865 proposed 
the following structure for benzene having 
cyclic arrangement of six carbon atoms with 
alternate single and double bonds and one 
hydrogen atom attached to each carbon atom.
 
	
The Kekulé structure indicates 
t h e  p o s s i b i l i t y  o f  t w o  i s o m e r i c  
1, 2-dibromobenzenes. In one of the isomers, 
the bromine atoms are attached to the 
doubly bonded carbon atoms whereas in the 
other, they are attached to the singly bonded 
carbons.
Friedrich August Kekulé,a German chemist was born in 1829 at Darmsdt in 
Germany. He became Professor in 1856 and Fellow of Royal Society in 1875. He 
made major contribution to structural organic chemistry by proposing in 1858 that 
carbon atoms can join to one another to form chains and later in 1865,he found 
an answer to the challenging problem of benzene structure by suggesting that 
these chains can close to form rings. He gave the dynamic structural  formula to 
benzene which forms the basis for its modern electronic structure. He described 
the discovery of benzene structure later as:
	
“I was sitting writing at my textbook,but the work did not progress; my thoughts 
were elsewhere. I turned my chair to the fire, and dozed. Again the atoms were 
gambolling before my eyes. This time the smaller groups kept modestly in the 
background. My mental eye, rendered more acute by repeated visions of this 
kind, could now distinguish larger structures of manifold  conformations; long 
rows,sometimes more closely fitted together; all twisting and turning in snake like motion. But look! What 
was that? One of the snakes had seized hold of it’s own tail, and the form whirled mockingly before my 
eyes. As if by a flash of lightning I woke;.... I spent the rest of the night working out the consequences of 
the hypothesis. Let us learn to dream, gentlemen, and then perhaps we shall learn the truth but let us 
beware of making our dreams public before they have been approved by the waking mind.”( 1890).
	
One hundred years later, on the occasion of Kekulé’s centenary celebrations a group of compounds 
having polybenzenoid structures have been named as Kekulenes.	
FRIEDRICH 
AUGUST KEKULÉ
(7th September 
1829–13th July 
1896)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 26 :
 320
chemistry
	
	
However, benzene was found to form only 
one ortho disubstituted product. This problem 
was overcome by Kekulé by suggesting the 
concept of oscillating nature of double bonds 
in benzene as given below.
	
Even with this modification, Kekulé 
structure of benzene  fails to explain unusual 
stability and preference to substitution 
reactions than addition reactions, which 
could later on be explained by resonance.
Resonance and stability of benzene
According to Valence Bond Theory, the 
concept of oscillating double bonds in benzene 
is now explained by resonance. Benzene is a 
hybrid of various resonating structures. The 
two structures, A and B given by Kekulé  are 
the main contributing structures. The hybrid 
structure is represented by inserting a circle 
or a dotted circle in the hexagon as shown 
in (C). The circle represents the six electrons 
which are delocalised between the six carbon 
atoms of the benzene ring.
   (A)	
	
  	
(B)	
                              (C)
	
The orbital overlapping gives us better 
picture about the structure of benzene. All 
the six carbon atoms in benzene are sp
2 
hybridized. Two sp
2 hybrid orbitals of each 
carbon atom overlap with sp
2 hybrid orbitals 
of adjacent carbon atoms to form six C—C 
sigma bonds which are in the hexagonal 
plane. The remaining sp
2 hybrid orbital of 
each carbon atom overlaps with s orbital 
of a hydrogen atom to form six C—H sigma 
bonds. Each carbon atom is now left with one 
unhybridised p orbital perpendicular to the 
plane of the ring as shown below:
	
The unhybridised p orbital of carbon atoms 
are close enough to form a π bond by lateral 
overlap. There are two equal possibilities of 
forming three π bonds by overlap of p orbitals 
of C1 –C2, C3  – C4, C5  – C6 or C2  – C3, C4  – C5, 
C6  – C1 respectively as shown in the following 
figures.
Fig. 9.7 (a)
Fig. 9.7 (b)
	
Structures shown in Fig. 9.7(a) and (b) 
correspond to two Kekulé’s structure with 
localised π bonds. The internuclear distance 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 27 :
 321
Hydrocarbons
between all the carbon atoms in the ring has 
been determined by the X-ray diffraction to 
be the same; there is equal probability for the 
p orbital of each carbon atom to overlap with 
the p orbitals of adjacent carbon atoms [Fig. 
9.7 (c)]. This can be represented in the form 
of two doughtnuts (rings) of electron clouds 
[Fig. 9.7 (d)], one above and one below the 
plane of the hexagonal ring as shown below:
	
Fig. 9.7 (c)	                   Fig. 9.7 (d)
	
The six π electrons are thus delocalised 
and can move freely about the six carbon 
nuclei, instead of any two as shown in  
Fig. 9.6 (a) or (b). The delocalised π electron cloud 
is attracted more strongly by the nuclei of the 
carbon atoms than the electron cloud localised 
between two carbon atoms. Therefore, presence 
of delocalised π electrons in benzene makes 
it more stable than the hypothetical 
cyclohexatriene.
	
X-Ray diffraction data reveals that benzene 
is a planar molecule. Had any one of the above 
structures of benzene (A or B) been correct, 
two types of C—C bond lengths were expected. 
However, X-ray data indicates that all the 
six C—C bond lengths are of the same order  
(139 pm) which is  intermediate between  
C— C single bond (154 pm) and C—C double 
bond (133 pm). Thus the absence of pure 
double bond in benzene accounts for the 
reluctance of benzene to show addition 
reactions under normal conditions, thus 
explaining the unusual behaviour of benzene.
9.5.3 Aromaticity
Benzene was considered as parent ‘aromatic’ 
compound. Now, the name is applied to all the 
ring systems whether or not having benzene 
ring, possessing following characteristics.
(i)	 Planarity
(ii)	 Complete delocalisation of the π electrons 
in the ring
(iii) Presence of (4n + 2) π electrons in the ring 
where n is an integer (n = 0, 1, 2, . . .). 
	
This is often referred to as Hückel Rule.
Some examples of aromatic compounds are 
given below:
	
          
9.5.4	
Preparation of Benzene
Benzene is commercially isolated from coal 
tar. However, it may be prepared in the 
laboratory by the following methods.
(i)	 Cyclic polymerisation of ethyne: 
(Section 9.4.4)
(ii)	 Decarboxylation of aromatic acids: 
Sodium salt of benzoic acid on heating 
with sodalime gives benzene.
(9.70)
(electron cloud)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 28 :
 322
chemistry
(iii) Reduction of phenol: Phenol is reduced 
to benzene by passing its vapours over 
heated zinc dust 
	
(9.71)
9.5.5 Properties
Physical properties 
Aromatic hydrocarbons are non- polar 
molecules and are usually colourless liquids 
or solids with a characteristic aroma. You are 
also familiar with naphthalene balls which are 
used in toilets and for preservation of clothes 
because of unique smell of the compound 
and the moth repellent property. Aromatic 
hydrocarbons are immiscible with water but 
are readily miscible with organic solvents. 
They burn with sooty flame.
Chemical properties 
Arenes are characterised by electrophilic 
substitution reactions. However, under 
special conditions they can also undergo 
addition and oxidation reactions.
Electrophilic substitution reactions
The common electrophilic substitution 
reactions of arenes are nitration, halogenation, 
sulphonation, Friedel Craft’s alkylation and 
acylation reactions in which attacking reagent 
is an electrophile (E
+)
(i)	 Nitration: A nitro group is introduced 
into benzene ring when benzene is heated 
with a mixture of concentrated nitric acid 
and concentrated sulphuric acid (nitrating 
mixture).
	
(9.72)
               Nitrobenzene
(ii)	 Halogenation: Arenes react with halogens 
in the presence of a Lewis acid like anhydrous 
FeCl3, FeBr3 or AlCl3 to yield haloarenes.
Chlorobenzene
	
(9.73)
(iii)	Sulphonation: The replacement of a 
hydrogen atom by a sulphonic acid group in 
a ring is called sulphonation. It is carried out 
by heating benzene with fuming sulphuric 
acid (oleum).
(9.74)
(iv)	Friedel-Crafts alkylation reaction: 
When benzene is treated with an alkyl halide 
in the presence of anhydrous aluminium 
chloride, alkylbenene is formed.
	
(9.75)
	
(9.76)
	
Why do we get isopropyl benzene on 
treating benzene with 1-chloropropane 
instead of n-propyl benzene?
(v)	 Friedel-Crafts acylation reaction: The 
reaction of benzene with an acyl halide or 
acid anhydride in the presence of Lewis acids 
(AlCl3) yields acyl benzene.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 29 :
 323
Hydrocarbons
(9.77)
	
(9.78)
	
If excess of electrophilic reagent is used, 
further substitution reaction may take place 
in which other hydrogen atoms of benzene 
ring may also be successively replaced 
by the electrophile. For example, benzene 
on treatment with excess of chlorine in 
the presence of anhydrous AlCl3 can be 
chlorinated to hexachlorobenzene (C6Cl6)
	
	
	
(9.79)
Mechanism of electrophilic substitution 
reactions:
According to experimental evidences, SE (S = 
substitution; E = electrophilic) reactions are 
supposed to proceed via the following three 
steps:
(a)	 Generation of the eletrophile 
(b)	 Formation of carbocation intermediate
(c)	 Removal of proton from the carbocation 
intermediate
(a)	 Generation of electrophile E
⊕: During 
chlorination, alkylation and acylation of 
benzene, anhydrous AlCl3, being a Lewis acid 
helps in generation of the elctrophile Cl
⊕, R
⊕, 
RC
⊕O (acylium ion) respectively by combining 
with the attacking reagent.
	
	
In the case of nitration, the electrophile, 
nitronium ion, 
 is produced by transfer of 
a proton (from sulphuric acid) to nitric acid 
in the following manner:
Step I	
Step II
	
Protonated
Nitronium
	
nitric acid
ion
	
It is interesting to note that in the process 
of generation of nitronium ion, sulphuric acid 
serves as an acid and nitric acid as a base. 
Thus, it is a simple acid-base equilibrium.
(b)	 F o r m a t i o n  o f  C a r b o c a t i o n  
	
(arenium ion): Attack of electrophile 
results in the formation of σ-complex or 
arenium ion in which one of the carbon is sp
3 
hybridised.
	
	
	
sigma complex (arenium ion)
	
The arenium ion  gets stabilised by 
resonance:
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 30 :
 324
chemistry
	
Sigma complex or arenium ion loses its 
aromatic character because delocalisation of 
electrons stops at sp
3 hybridised carbon.
(c) 	Removal of proton: To restore the 
aromatic character, σ -complex releases 
proton from sp
3 hybridised carbon on attack 
by [AlCl4]
– (in case of halogenation, alkylation 
and acylation) and [HSO4]
– (in case of 
nitration).
Addition reactions
Under  vigorous conditions, i.e., at high 
temperature and/ or pressure in the presence 
of nickel catalyst, hydrogenation of benzene 
gives cyclohexane.
	 	

Cyclohexane
(9.80)
	
Under ultra-violet light, three chlorine 
molecules add to benzene to produce benzene 
hexachloride, C6H6Cl6 which is also called 
gammaxane.
Benzene hexachloride, 
	
	
	
	
	
	
(BHC)
(9.81)
Combustion: When heated in air, benzene 
burns with sooty flame producing CO2 and 
H2O
6
2
2
2
6
15
C H
O
2
6CO +3H O
+
→
	
(9.82)
General combustion reaction for any 
hydrocarbon may be given by the following 
chemical equation:
CxHy + (x + 
) O2 → x CO2 + 
 H2O  n (9.83)
9.5.6	
Directive influence of a functional 
group in monosubstituted benzene
When monosubstituted benzene is subjected 
to further substitution, three possible 
disubstituted products are not formed in 
equal amounts. Two types of behaviour are 
observed. Either ortho and para products or 
meta product is predominantly formed. It 
has also been observed that this behaviour 
depends on the nature of the substituent 
already present in the benzene ring and not 
on the nature of the entering group. This is 
known as directive influence of substituents. 
Reasons for ortho/para or meta directive 
nature of groups are discussed below:
Ortho and para directing groups: The 
groups which direct the incoming group to 
ortho and para positions are called ortho and 
para directing groups. As an example, let us 
discuss the directive influence of phenolic  
(–OH) group. Phenol is resonance hybrid of 
following structures:
It is clear from the above resonating 
structures that the electron density is more on 
o – and p – positions. Hence, the substitution 
takes place mainly at these positions. However, 
it may be noted that –I effect of – OH group also 
operates due to which the electron density on 
ortho and para positions of the benzene ring 
is slightly reduced. But the overall electron 
density increases at  these positions of the 
ring due to resonance. Therefore, –OH group 
activates the benzene ring for the attack by 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 31 :
 325
Hydrocarbons
an electrophile. Other examples of activating 
groups are –NH2, –NHR, –NHCOCH3, –OCH3, 
–CH3, –C2H5, etc.
In the case of aryl halides, halogens are 
moderately deactivating. Because of their  
strong – I effect, overall electron density on 
benzene ring decreases. It makes further 
substitution difficult. However, due to 
resonance the electron density on o– and 
p– positions is greater than that at the 
m-position. Hence, they are also o– and p – 
directing groups. Resonance structures of 
chlorobenzene are given below:
In this case, the overall electron density 
on benzene ring decreases making further 
substitution difficult, therefore these groups 
are also called ‘deactivating groups’. The 
electron density on o – and p – position 
is comparatively less than that at meta 
position. Hence, the electrophile attacks on 
comparatively electron rich meta position 
resulting in meta substitution.
9.6 Carcinogenicity and Toxicity
Benzene and polynuclear hydrocarbons 
containing more than two benzene rings 
fused together are toxic and said to 
possess cancer producing (carcinogenic) 
property. Such polynuclear hydrocarbons 
are formed on incomplete combustion of 
organic materials like tobacco, coal and 
petroleum. They enter into human body 
and undergo various biochemical reactions 
and finally damage DNA and cause cancer. 
Some of the carcinogenic hydrocarbons are 
given below (see box).
Meta directing group: The groups which 
direct the incoming group to meta position are 
called meta directing groups. Some examples 
of meta directing groups are –NO2, –CN, –CHO, 
–COR, –COOH, –COOR, –SO3H, etc. 
	
Let us take the example of nitro group. 
Nitro group reduces the electron density in 
the benzene ring due to its strong–I effect. 
Nitrobenzene is a resonance hybrid of the 
following structures.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 32 :
 326
chemistry
SUMMARY
Hydrocarbons are the compounds of carbon and hydrogen only. Hydrocarbons are mainly 
obtained from coal and petroleum, which are the major sources of energy. Petrochemicals 
are the prominent starting materials used for the manufacture of a large number of 
commercially important products. LPG (liquefied petroleum gas) and  CNG (compressed 
natural gas), the main sources of energy for domestic fuels and the automobile industry, are 
obtained from petroleum. Hydrocarbons are classified as open chain saturated (alkanes) 
and unsaturated (alkenes and alkynes), cyclic (alicyclic) and aromatic, according to their 
structure. 
The important reactions of alkanes are free radical substitution, combustion, oxidation 
and aromatization. Alkenes and alkynes undergo addition reactions, which are mainly 
electrophilic additions. Aromatic hydrocarbons, despite having unsaturation, undergo 
mainly electrophilic substitution reactions. These undergo addition reactions only under 
special conditions. 
Alkanes show conformational isomerism due to free rotation along the C–C sigma 
bonds. Out of staggered and the eclipsed conformations of ethane, staggered conformation 
is more stable as hydrogen atoms are farthest apart. Alkenes exhibit geometrical  
(cis-trans) isomerism due to restricted rotation around the carbon–carbon double bond. 
Benzene and benzenoid compounds show aromatic character. Aromaticity, the 
property of being aromatic is possessed by compounds having specific electronic structure 
characterised by Hückel (4n+2)π electron rule. The nature of groups or substituents attached 
to benzene ring is responsible for activation or deactivation of the benzene ring towards 
further electrophilic substitution and also for orientation of the incoming group. Some of 
the polynuclear hydrocarbons having fused benzene ring system have carcinogenic property. 
EXERCISES
9.1 	
How do you account for the formation of ethane during chlorination of methane ?
9.2	
Write IUPAC names of the following compounds : 
	
(a)	CH3CH=C(CH3)2	
	
(b)	
CH2=CH-C≡C-CH3
	
(c)	
	
	
	
(d)	
–CH2–CH2–CH=CH2
	
(e)	
	 	
	
(f)	
CH3(CH2)4 CH (CH2)3 CH3
	
	
CH2 –CH (CH3)2
	
(g)	CH3 – CH = CH – CH2 – CH = CH – CH – CH2 – CH = CH2
	
	
|
	
	
C2H5
9.3	
For the following compounds, write structural formulas and IUPAC names for all 
possible isomers having the number of double or triple bond as indicated : 
	
(a) 	 C4H8 (one double bond)	
	
	
(b)   C5H8 (one triple bond)
9.4	
Write IUPAC names of the products obtained by the ozonolysis of the following 
compounds :
	
(i)	 Pent-2-ene	
	
	
	
(ii)  3,4-Dimethylhept-3-ene
	
(iii)  2-Ethylbut-1-ene 	
	
	
(iv)  1-Phenylbut-1-ene
2024-25


 Book : class_11_chemistry_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 33 :
 327
Hydrocarbons
9.5	
An alkene ‘A’ on ozonolysis gives a mixture of ethanal and pentan-3-one. 
Write structure and IUPAC name of ‘A’.
9.6	
An alkene ‘A’ contains three C – C, eight C – H σ bonds and one C – C π 
bond. ‘A’ on ozonolysis gives two moles of an aldehyde of molar mass 44 
u. Write IUPAC name of ‘A’.
9.7 	
Propanal and pentan-3-one are the ozonolysis products of an alkene? What 
is the structural formula of the alkene?
9.8	
Write chemical equations for combustion reaction of the following 
hydrocarbons: 
	
(i)	 Butane		
	
	
(ii)  Pentene	
	
(iii) Hexyne	
	
	
(iv)  Toluene
9.9	
Draw the cis and trans structures of hex-2-ene. Which isomer will have 
higher b.p. and why?
9.10 	 Why is benzene extra ordinarily stable though it contains three double 
bonds?
9.11	
What are the necessary conditions for any system to be aromatic?
9.12	
Explain why the following systems are not aromatic?
	
(i)	
	 	
(ii)	
 	
(iii)	
9.13 	 How will you convert benzene into
	
(i) 	 p-nitrobromobenzene		
(ii)  m- nitrochlorobenzene
	
(iii) 	p - nitrotoluene	
	
(iv)  acetophenone?
9.14	
In the alkane H3C – CH2 – C(CH3)2 – CH2 – CH(CH3)2, identify 1°,2°,3° carbon 
atoms and give the number of H atoms bonded to each one of these.
9.15	
What effect does branching of an alkane chain has on its boiling point?
9.16	
Addition of HBr to propene yields 2-bromopropane, while in the presence 
of benzoyl peroxide, the same reaction yields 1-bromopropane. Explain 
and give mechanism.
9.17	
Write down the products of ozonolysis of 1,2-dimethylbenzene (o-xylene). 
How does the result support Kekulé structure for benzene?
9.18	
Arrange benzene, n-hexane and ethyne in decreasing order of acidic 
behaviour. Also give reason for this behaviour.
9.19	
Why does benzene undergo electrophilic substitution reactions easily and 
nucleophilic substitutions with difficulty?
9.20	
How would you convert the following compounds into benzene?
	
(i)	 Ethyne		
(ii)  Ethene	
	
(iii)  Hexane	
9.21	
Write structures of all the alkenes which on hydrogenation give  
2-methylbutane.
9.22	
Arrange the following set of compounds in order of their decreasing relative 
reactivity with an electrophile, E
+
	
(a)	 Chlorobenzene, 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzene, p-nitrochlorobenzene
	
(b)	Toluene, p-H3C – C6H4 – NO2, p-O2N – C6H4 – NO2.
9.23	
Out of benzene, m–dinitrobenzene and toluene which will undergo nitration 
most easily and why?
9.24	
Suggest the name of a Lewis acid other than anhydrous aluminium chloride 
which can be used during ethylation of benzene.
9.25	
Why is Wurtz reaction not preferred for the preparation of alkanes 
containing odd number of carbon atoms? Illustrate your answer by taking 
one example. 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 1 :
 ANSWERS
CHAPTER 1
1.1
6 × 10–3 N  (repulsive)
1.2
(a)
12 cm
(b)
0.2 N (attractive)
1.3
2.4 × 1039. This is the ratio of electric force to the  gravitational force
(at the same distance) between an electron and a proton.
1.5
Charge is not created or destroyed. It is merely transferred from one
body to another.
1.6
Zero N
1.8
(a)
5.4 ×  106 N C–1 along OB
(b)
8.1  ×  10–3 N along OA
1.9
Total charge is zero. Dipole moment  = 7.5 × 10–8 C m along z-axis.
1.10
10–4  N m
1.11
(a)
2 × 1012,  from wool to polythene.
(b)
Yes, but of a negligible amount ( = 2 × 10–18 kg in the example).
1.12
(a)
1.5  ×  10–2 N
(b)
0.24 N
1.13
Charges 1 and 2 are negative, charge 3 is positive. Particle 3 has
the highest charge to mass ratio.
1.14
(a) 30Nm2/C,    (b) 15 Nm2/C
1.15
Zero. The number of lines entering the cube is the same as the
number of lines leaving the cube.
1.16
(a)
0.07  mC
(b)
No, only that the net charge inside is zero.
1.17
2.2 × 105 N m2/C
1.18
1.9 × 105 N m2/C
1.19
(a)
–103 N m2/C;  because the charge enclosed is the same in the
two cases.
(b)
–8.8 nC
1.20
–6.67 nC
1.21
(a)
1.45 ×  10–3 C
(b)
1.6  × 108  Nm2/C
1.22
10 mC/m
1.23
(a)  Zero,  (b)  Zero,  (c)  1.9 N/C
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 2 :
 Physics
216
CHAPTER 2
2.1
10 cm, 40 cm away from the positive charge on the side of the
negative charge.
2.2
2.7 × 106  V
2.3
(a) The plane  normal to AB and passing through its mid-point has
zero potential everywhere.
(b) Normal to the plane in the direction AB.
2.4
(a)
Zero
(b)
105 N C–1
(c)
4.4 × 104 N C–1
2.5
96 pF
2.6
(a)
3 pF
(b)
40 V
2.7
(a)
9  pF
(b)
2 × 10–10 C,  3 × 10–10 C,  4 × 10–10 C
2.8
18 pF, 1.8 × 10–9 C
2.9
(a)
V = 100 V, C = 108 pF, Q = 1.08 × 10–8 C
(b)
Q = 1.8 × 10–9 C, C = 108 pF, V = 16.6 V
2.10
1.5 × 10–8 J
2.11
6 × 10–6 J
CHAPTER 3
3.1
30 A
3.2
17 Ω, 8.5 V
3.3
1027 °C
3.4
2.0 × 10–7 Ωm
3.5
0.0039 °C–1
3.6
867 °C
3.7
Current in branch AB = (4/17) A,
in BC = (6/17) A, in CD = (–4/17) A,
in AD = (6/17) A, in BD. = (–2/17) A, total current = (10/17) A.
3.8
11.5 V; the series resistor limits the current drawn from the external
source. In its absence, the current will be dangerously high.
3.9
2.7 × 104 s (7.5 h)
CHAPTER 4
4.1
π × 10–4 T ≃ 3.1 × 10–4 T
4.2
3.5 × 10–5 T
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 3 :
 217
Answers
4.3
4 × 10–6 T, vertical up
4.4
1.2 × 10–5 T, towards south
4.5
0.6 N m–1
4.6
8.1 × 10–2 N; direction of force given by Fleming’s left-hand rule
4.7
2 × 10–5 N; attractive force normal to A towards B
4.8
8π × 10–3 T ≃ 2.5 × 10–2 T
4.9
0.96 N m
4.10
(a) 1.4, (b) 1
4.11
4.2 cm
4.12
18 MHz
4.13
(a) 3.1 Nm, (b) No, the answer is unchanged because the formula
τττττ = N I A × B is true for a planar loop of any shape.
CHAPTER 5
5.1
0.36 JT–1
5.2
(a)
m parallel to B; U =  –mB  =  –4.8 × 10–2 J: stable.
(b)
m anti-parallel to B; U = +mB = +4.8 × 10–2 J; unstable.
5.3
0.60 JT–1 along the axis of the solenoid determined by the sense of
flow of the current.
5.4       7.5 ×10–2 J
5.5
(a) (i) 0.33 J    (ii) 0.66 J
(b) (i) Torque of magnitude 0.33 J in a direction that tends to align
the magnitude moment vector along B.   (ii) Zero.
5.6
(a)
1.28 A m2 along the axis in the direction related to the sense of
current via the right-handed screw rule.
(b)
Force is zero in uniform field; torque = 0.048 Nm in a direction
that tends to align the axis of the solenoid (i.e., its magnetic
moment vector) along B.
5.7
(a)
0.96 g along S-N direction.
(b)
0.48 G along N-S direction.
CHAPTER 6
6.1
(a)
Along qrpq
(b)
Along prq, along yzx
(c)
Along yzx
(d)
Along zyx
(e)
Along xry
(f )
No induced current since field lines lie in the plane of the loop.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 4 :
 Physics
218
6.2
(a)
Along adcd (flux through the surface increases during shape
change, so induced current produces opposing flux).
(b)
Along a′d′c′b′ (flux decreases during the process)
6.3
7.5 × 10–6 V
6.4
(1)
2.4 × 10–4 V, lasting 2 s
(2)
0.6 × 10–4 V, lasting 8 s
6.5
100 V
6.6
(a) 1.5 × 10–3 V, (b) West to East, (c) Eastern end.
6.7
4H
6.8
30 Wb
CHAPTER 7
7.1
(a)
2.20 A
(b)
484 W
7.2
(a)
300
2
2121
=
. V
(b)
10 2
141
=
. A
7.3
15.9 A
7.4
2.49 A
7.5
Zero in each case.
7.6
1.1 × 103 s–1
7.7
2,000 W
7.8
(a)
50 rad s–1
(b)
40 Ω, 8.1 A
(c)
VLrms = 1437 5
.  V, VCrms = 1437 5
. V , VRrms = 230 V
V
I
L
C
LCrms
rms
=
−



=
ω
ω
0
0
1
0
CHAPTER 8
8.1
(a)
0
/
C
A
d
ε
=
= 8.00 pF
d
d
d
d
Q
V
C
t
t
=
–12
0.15
80.1
10
dV
dt =
×
9
–1
1.87
10 V s
=
×
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 5 :
 219
Answers
(b)
0
.
d
d
di
t
ε
ΦΕ
=
. Now across the capacitor ΦE = EA, ignoring end
corrections.
Therefore,
0
d
d
di
A
t
Φ
ε
Ε
=
Now,
0
Q
E
A
ε
=
. Therefore, 
0
d
d
E
i
t
A
ε
=
, which implies id = i = 0.15 A.
(c)
Yes, provided by ‘current’ we mean the sum of conduction and
displacement currents.
8.2
(a)
Irms = Vrms ωC = 6.9µA
(b)
Yes. The derivation in Exercise 8.1(b) is true even if i is oscillating
in time.
(c)
The formula 
0
2
2
d
r
B
i
R
µ
π
=
goes through even if id (and therefore B) oscillates in time. The
formula shows they oscillate in phase. Since id = i, we have
0
0
0
2
2
r
B
i
R
µ
π
=
, where B0 and i0 are the amplitudes of the oscillating
magnetic field and current, respectively. i0=
rms
2I
= 9.76 µA. For
r = 3 cm, R = 6 cm, B0 = 1.63 × 10–11 T.
8.3
The speed in vacuum is the same for all: c = 3 × 108 m s–1.
8.4
E and B in x-y plane and are mutually perpendicular,  10 m.
8.5
Wavelength band: 40 m – 25 m.
8.6
109 Hz
8.7
153 N/C
8.8
(a) 400 nT,  3.14 × 108 rad/s, 1.05 rad/m, 6.00 m.
(b) E = { (120 N/C) sin[(1.05 rad/m)]x – (3.14 × 108 rad/s)t]} jˆ
B = { (400 nT) sin[(1.05 rad/m)]x – (3.14 × 108 rad/s)t]} kˆ
8.9
Photon energy (for λ = 1 m)
= 
34
8
6
19
6.63
10
3
10
eV
1.24
10
eV
1.6
10
−
−
−
×
×
×
=
×
×
Photon energy for other wavelengths in the figure for electromagnetic
spectrum can be obtained by multiplying approximate powers of
ten. Energy of a photon that a source produces indicates the spacings
of the relevant energy levels of the source. For example, λ = 10–12 m
corresponds to photon energy = 1.24 × 106 eV = 1.24 MeV. This
indicates that nuclear energy levels (transition between which causes
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : answers - Page 6 :
 Physics
220
γ-ray emission) are typically spaced by 1 MeV or so. Similarly, a
visible wavelength λ = 5 × 10–7 m, corresponds to photon energy
= 2.5 eV. This implies that energy levels (transition between which
gives visible radiation) are typically spaced by a few eV.
8.10
(a)
λ = (c/ν) = 1.5 × 10–2 m
(b)
B0 = (E0/c) = 1.6 × 10–7 T
(c)
Energy density in E field: uE = (1/2)ε0 E 2
Energy density in B field: uB = (1/2µ0)B 2
Using E = cB, and c = 
0
0
1
µ ε
, uE = uB
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 1 :
 PHYSICS
PART – I
TEXTBOOK FOR CLASS XII
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 2 :
 First Edition
December 2006 Pausa 1928
Reprinted
December 2007, December 2008,
December 2009, January 2011,
January 2012, November 2012,
November 2013, December 2014,
December 2015, February 2017,
January 2018, January 2019,
October 2019, August 2021 and
December 2021
Revised Edition
November 2022 Agrahayana 1944
Reprinted
March 2024
Chaitra 1946
PD 325T SU
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2006, 2022
` 200.00
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted,
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise
without the prior permission of the publisher.
q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,  be lent,  re-sold,
hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent, in any form of binding
or cover other than that in which it is published.
q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised price
indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect and should
be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021
Phone :  0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication
: Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Editor
: Shveta Uppal
Chief Production
: Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business
: Amitabh Kumar
Manager (In charge)
Assistant Editor
: R.N. Bhardwaj
Assistant Production
: Sunil Kumar
Officer
Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Shweta Rao
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by  the
Secretary, National Council of  Educational
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo Marg,
New Delhi 110 016 and printed at Eye Vision
Printograph, 78, Mohkampur Industrial
Complex, Phase-I, Delhi Road, Meerut - 250 002
(U.P.)
12089 – PHYSICS  PART I
Textbook for Class XII
ISBN 81-7450-631-4
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 3 :
 FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005 recommends that children’s life at school must
be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish
learning which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the school, home and
community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement
this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will take us significantly
further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on
Education (NPE), 1986.
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teachers will take to
encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions.
We must recognise that, given space, time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging
with the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis
of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as participants in
learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change in school routines and mode of functioning. Flexibility in
the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the
required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching
and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at
school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried
to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different
stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook
attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for
contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on
experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates the hard
work done by the textbook development committee responsible for this book. We wish to thank the
Chairperson of the advisory group in science and mathematics, Professor J.V. Narlikar and the
Chief Advisor for this book, Professor A.W. Joshi for guiding the work of this committee. Several
teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for
making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations which have generously
permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and personnel. We are especially grateful to
the members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary
and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As
an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its
products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi
National Council of Educational
20 December 2006
Research and Training
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 4 :
 2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 5 :
 RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on
students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the
content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative
mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to rationalise
the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT
across classes have been taken into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:
•
Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the same
class
•
Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject
•
Difficulty level
•
Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions
from teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or peer-
learning
•
Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes
given above.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 6 :
 2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 7 :
 TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON, ADVISORY GROUP FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics
(IUCAA), Ganeshkhind, Pune University Campus, Pune
CHIEF ADVISOR
A.W. Joshi, Honorary Visiting Scientist, National Centre for Radio Astrophysics (NCRA), Pune
University Campus, Pune (Formerly Professor at Department of Physics, University of Pune)
MEMBERS
A.K. Ghatak, Emeritus Professor, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology,
New Delhi
Alika Khare, Professor, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati
Anjali Kshirsagar, Reader, Department of Physics, University of Pune, Pune
Anuradha Mathur, PGT , Modern School, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi
Atul Mody, Lecturer (S.G.), VES College of Arts, Science and Commerce, Mumbai
B.K. Sharma, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Chitra Goel, PGT, Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Tyagraj Nagar, New Delhi
Gagan Gupta, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
H.C. Pradhan, Professor, Homi Bhabha Centre of Science Education (TIFR), Mumbai
N. Panchapakesan, Professor (Retd.), Department of Physics and Astrophysics, University of
Delhi, Delhi
R. Joshi, Lecturer (S.G.), DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
S.K. Dash, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
S. Rai Choudhary, Professor, Department of Physics and Astrophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi
S.K. Upadhyay, PGT, Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya, Muzaffar Nagar
S.N. Prabhakara, PGT, DM School,  Regional Institute of Education (NCERT), Mysore
V.H. Raybagkar, Reader, Nowrosjee Wadia College, Pune
Vishwajeet Kulkarni, Teacher (Grade I ), Higher Secondary Section, Smt. Parvatibai Chowgule
College, Margao, Goa
MEMBER-COORDINATOR
V.P. Srivastava, Reader,  DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 8 :
 Constitution of India
Fundamental Duties
It shall be the duty of every citizen of India —
(a) to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the
National Flag and the National Anthem;
(b) to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle
for freedom;
(c) to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d) to defend the country and render national service when called upon to
do so;
(e) to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all
the people of India transcending religious, linguistic and regional or
sectional diversities; to renounce practices derogatory to the dignity of
women;
(f)
to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes,
rivers, wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures;
(h) to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and
reform;
(i)
to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j)
to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective
activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour
and achievement;
*(k) who is a parent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to
his child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and
fourteen years.
Note: The Article 51A containing Fundamental Duties was inserted by the Constitution
(42nd Amendment) Act, 1976 (with effect from 3 January 1977).
*(k) was inserted by the Constitution (86th Amendment) Act, 2002 (with effect from
1 April 2010).
Part IV A (Article 51 A)
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 9 :
 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges the valuable
contribution of the individuals and organisations involved in the development of Physics Textbook
for Class XII. The Council also acknowledges the valuable contribution of the following academics
for reviewing and refining the manuscripts of this book:
Anu Venugopalan, Lecturer, School of Basic and Applied Sciences, GGSIP University, Delhi;
A.K. Das, PGT, St. Xavier’s Senior Secondary School, Delhi; Bharati Kukkal, PGT, Kendriya
Vidyalaya, Pushp Vihar, New Delhi; D.A. Desai, Lecturer (Retd.), Ruparel College, Mumbai;
Devendra Kumar, PGT, Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Yamuna Vihar, Delhi; I.K. Gogia, PGT,
Kendriya Vidyalaya, Gole Market, New Delhi; K.C. Sharma, Reader, Regional Institute of Education
(NCERT), Ajmer; M.K. Nandy, Associate Professor, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of
Technology, Guwahati; M.N. Bapat, Reader, Regional Institute of Education (NCERT), Mysuru;
R. Bhattacharjee, Assistant Professor, Department of Electronics and Communication
Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati; R.S. Das, Vice-Principal (Retd.), Balwant
Ray Mehta Senior Secondary School, Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi; Sangeeta D. Gadre, Reader, Kirori
Mal College, Delhi; Suresh Kumar, PGT, Delhi Public School, Dwarka, New Delhi; Sushma Jaireth,
Reader, Department of Women’s Studies, NCERT, New Delhi; Shyama Rath, Reader, Department
of Physics and Astrophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi; Yashu Kumar, PGT, Kulachi Hans Raj
Model School, Ashok Vihar, Delhi.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the valuable contribution of  the following academics
for the editing and finalisation of this book: B.B. Tripathi, Professor (Retd.), Department of Physics,
Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi; Dipan K. Ghosh, Professor, Department of Physics,
Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai; Dipanjan Mitra, Scientist, National Centre for Radio
Astrophysics (TIFR), Pune; G.K. Mehta, Raja Ramanna Fellow, Inter-University Accelerator
Centre, New Delhi; G.S. Visweswaran, Professor, Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology, New Delhi; H.C. Kandpal, Head, Optical Radiation Standards, National
Physical Laboratory, New Delhi; H.S. Mani, Raja Ramanna Fellow, Institute of Mathematical
Sciences, Chennai; K. Thyagarajan, Professor, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of
Technology, New Delhi; P.C. Vinod Kumar, Professor, Department of Physics, Sardar Patel
University, Vallabh Vidyanagar, Gujarat; S. Annapoorni, Professor, Department of Physics and
Astrophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi; S.C. Dutta Roy, Emeritus Professor, Department of
Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi; S.D. Joglekar, Professor,
Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur; and V. Sundara Raja, Professor,
Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati.
The Council also acknowledges the valuable contributions of the following academics for
refining the text in 2017: A.K. Srivastava, Assistant Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi; Arnab
Sen, Assistant Professor, NERIE, Shillong; L.S. Chauhan, Assistant Professor, RIE, Bhopal;
O.N. Awasthi, Professor (Retd.), RIE, Bhopal; Rachna Garg, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New
Delhi; Raman Namboodiri, Assistant Professor, RIE, Mysuru; R.R. Koireng, Assistant Professor,
DCS, NCERT, New Delhi; Shashi Prabha, Professor, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi; and S.V. Sharma,
Professor, RIE, Ajmer.
Special thanks are due to Hukum Singh, Professor and  Head, DESM, NCERT for his support.
The Council also acknowledges the support provided by the APC office and the administrative
staff of the DESM; Deepak Kapoor, Incharge, Computer Station; Inder Kumar, DTP Operator;
Mohd. Qamar Tabrez, Copy Editor; Ashima Srivastava, Proof Reader in shaping this book.
The contributions of the Publication Department in bringing out this book are also duly
acknowledged.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 10 :
 CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
Part III (Articles 12 – 35)
(Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions
and reasonable restrictions)
guarantees these
Fundamental Rights
Right to Equality
· before law and equal protection of laws;
· irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth;
· of opportunity in public employment;
· by abolition of untouchability and titles.
Right to Freedom
· of expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession;
· of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences;
· of protection of life and personal liberty;
· of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six and fourteen years;
· of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases.
Right against Exploitation
· for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour;
· for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs.
Right to Freedom of Religion
· freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion;
· freedom to manage religious affairs;
· freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion;
· freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in educational
institutions wholly maintained by the State.
Cultural and Educational Rights
· for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture;
· for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice.
Right to Constitutional Remedies
· by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High
Courts for enforcement of these Fundamental Rights.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 11 :
 PREFACE
It gives me pleasure to place this book in the hands of the students, teachers and the public at
large (whose role cannot be overlooked). It is a natural sequel to the Class XI textbook which
was brought out in 2006. This book is also a trimmed version of the textbooks which existed so
far. The chapter on thermal and chemical effects of current has been cut out. This topic has also
been dropped from the CBSE syllabus. Similarly, the chapter on communications has been
substantially curtailed. It has been rewritten in an easily comprehensible form.
Although most other chapters have been based on the earlier versions, several parts and
sections in them have been rewritten. The Development Team has been guided by the feedback
received from innumerable teachers across the country.
In producing these books, Class XI as well as Class XII, there has been a basic change of
emphasis. Both the books present physics to students without assuming that they would pursue
this subject beyond the higher secondary level. This new view has been prompted by the various
observations and suggestions made in the National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005.
Similarly, in today’s educational scenario where students can opt for various combinations of
subjects, we cannot assume that a physics student is also studying mathematics. Therefore,
physics has to be presented, so to say, in a standalone form.
As in Class XI textbook, some interesting box items have been inserted in many chapters.
They are not meant for teaching or examinations. Their purpose is to catch the attention of the
reader, to show some applications in daily life or in other areas of science and technology, to
suggest a simple experiment, to show connection of concepts in different areas of physics, and
in general, to break the monotony and enliven the book.
Features like Summary, Points to Ponder, Exercises and Additional Exercises at the end of
each chapter, and Examples have been retained. Several concept-based Exercises have been
transferred from end-of-chapter Exercises to Examples with Solutions in the text. It is hoped
that this will make the concepts discussed in the chapter more comprehensible. Several new
examples and exercises have been added. Students wishing to pursue physics further would
find Points to Ponder and Additional Exercises very useful and thoughtful. To provide resources
beyond the textbook  and to encourage eLearning, each chapter has been provided with
some relevant website addresses under the title ePhysics. These sites provide additional
material on specific topics and also provide learners with opportunites for interactive
demonstrations/experiments.
The intricate concepts of physics must be understood, comprehended and appreciated.
Students must learn to ask questions like ‘why’, ‘how’, ‘how do we know it’. They will find
almost always that the question ‘why’ has no answer within the domain of physics and science
in general. But that itself is a learning experience, is it not? On the other hand, the question
‘how’ has been reasonably well answered by physicists in the case of most natural phenomena.
In fact, with the understanding of how things happen, it has been possible to make use of many
phenomena to create technological applications for the use of humans.
For example, consider statements in a book, like ‘A negatively charged electron is attracted
by the positively charged plate’, or ‘In this experiment, light (or electron) behaves like a wave’.
You will realise that it is not possible to answer ‘why’. This question belongs to the domain of
philosophy or metaphysics. But we can answer ‘how’, we can find the force acting, we can find
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 12 :
 the wavelength of the photon (or electron), we can determine how things behave under different
conditions, and we can develop instruments which will use these phenomena to our advantage.
It has been a pleasure to work for these books at the higher secondary level, along with a
team of members. The Textbook Development Team, Review Team and Editing Teams involved
college and university teachers, teachers from Indian Institutes of Technology, scientists from
national institutes and laboratories, as well as, higher secondary teachers. The feedback and
critical look provided by higher secondary teachers in the various teams are highly laudable.
Most box items were generated by members of one or the other team, but three of them were
generated by friends and well-wishers not part of any team. We are thankful to Dr P.N. Sen of
Pune, Professor Roopmanjari Ghosh of Delhi and Dr Rajesh B Khaparde of Mumbai for allowing
us to use their box items, respectively, in Chapters 3, 4 (Part I) and 9 (Part II). We are thankful
to the members of the review and editing workshops to discuss and refine the first draft of the
textbook.  We also express our gratitude to Prof. Krishna Kumar, Director, NCERT, for entrusting
us with the task of presenting this textbook as a part of the national effort for improving science
education. I also thank Prof. G. Ravindra, Joint Director, NCERT,  for his help from time-to-
time. Prof. Hukum Singh, Head, Department of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCERT,
was always willing to help us in our endeavour in every possible way.
We welcome suggestions and comments from our valued users, especially students and
teachers. We wish our young readers a happy journey into the exciting realm of physics.
A. W. JOSHI
Chief Advisor
Textbook Development Committee
xii
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 13 :
 CONTENTS
FOREWORD
iii
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS
v
CHAPTER ONE
ELECTRIC CHARGES AND FIELDS
1.1
Introduction
1
1.2
Electric Charge
1
1.3
Conductors and Insulators
3
1.4
Basic Properties of Electric Charge
4
1.5
Coulomb’s Law
6
1.6
Forces between Multiple Charges
11
1.7
Electric Field
14
1.8
Electric Field Lines
19
1.9
Electric Flux
21
1.10
Electric Dipole
23
1.11
Dipole in a Uniform External Field
27
1.12
Continuous Charge Distribution
28
1.13
Gauss’s Law
29
1.14
Applications of Gauss’s Law
33
CHAPTER TWO
ELECTROSTATIC POTENTIAL AND CAPACITANCE
2.1
Introduction
45
2.2
Electrostatic Potential
47
2.3
Potential due to a Point Charge
48
2.4
Potential due to an Electric Dipole
49
2.5
Potential due to a System of Charges
51
2.6
Equipotential Surfaces
54
2.7
Potential Energy of a System of Charges
55
2.8
Potential Energy in an External Field
58
2.9
Electrostatics of Conductors
61
2.10
Dielectrics and Polarisation
65
2.11
Capacitors and Capacitance
67
2.12
The Parallel Plate Capacitor
68
2.13
Effect of Dielectric on Capacitance
69
2.14
Combination of Capacitors
71
2.15
Energy Stored in a Capacitor
73
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 14 :
 CHAPTER THREE
CURRENT ELECTRICITY
3.1
Introduction
81
3.2
Electric Current
81
3.3
Electric Currents in Conductors
82
3.4
Ohm’s law
83
3.5
Drift of Electrons and the Origin of Resistivity
85
3.6
Limitations of Ohm’s Law
89
3.7
Resistivity of Various Materials
89
3.8
Temperature Dependence of Resistivity
90
3.9
Electrical Energy, Power
92
3.10
Cells, emf, Internal Resistance
93
3.11
Cells in Series and in Parallel
95
3.12
Kirchhoff’s Rules
97
3.13
Wheatstone Bridge
100
CHAPTER FOUR
MOVING CHARGES AND MAGNETISM
4.1
Introduction
107
4.2
Magnetic Force
108
4.3
Motion in a Magnetic Field
112
4.4
Magnetic Field due to a Current Element, Biot-Savart Law
113
4.5
Magnetic Field on the Axis of a Circular Current Loop
115
4.6
Ampere’s Circuital Law
117
4.7
The Solenoid
121
4.8
Force between Two Parallel Currents, the Ampere
122
4.9
Torque on Current Loop, Magnetic Dipole
124
4.10
The Moving Coil Galvanometer
129
CHAPTER FIVE
MAGNETISM AND MATTER
5.1
Introduction
136
5.2
The Bar Magnet
137
5.3
Magnetism and Gauss’s Law
142
5.4
Magnetisation and Magnetic Intensity
145
5.5
Magnetic Properties of Materials
147
xiv
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 15 :
 CHAPTER SIX
ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION
6.1
Introduction
154
6.2
The Experiments of Faraday and Henry
155
6.3
Magnetic Flux
156
6.4
Faraday’s Law of Induction
157
6.5
Lenz’s Law and Conservation of Energy
160
6.6
Motional Electromotive Force
162
6.7
Inductance
165
6.8
AC Generator
170
CHAPTER SEVEN
ALTERNATING CURRENT
7.1
Introduction
177
7.2
AC Voltage Applied to a Resistor
178
7.3
Representation of AC Current and Voltage by
Rotating Vectors — Phasors
181
7.4
AC Voltage Applied to an Inductor
181
7.5
AC Voltage Applied to a Capacitor
184
7.6
AC Voltage Applied to a Series LCR Circuit
186
7.7
Power in AC Circuit: The Power Factor
190
7.8
Transformers
194
CHAPTER EIGHT
ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
8.1
Introduction
201
8.2
Displacement Current
202
8.3
Electromagnetic Waves
205
8.4
Electromagnetic Spectrum
208
ANSWERS
215
xv
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 16 :
 COVER DESIGN
(Adapted from http://nobelprize.org and
the Nobel Prize in Physics 2006)
Different stages in the evolution of
the universe.
BACK COVER
(Adapted from http://www.iter.org and
http://www.dae.gov.in)
Cut away view of International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER)
device. The man in the bottom shows the scale.
ITER is a joint international research and development project that
aims to demonstrate the scientific and technical feasibility of fusion power.
India is one of the seven full partners in the project, the others being
the European Union (represented by EURATOM), Japan, the People’s
Republic of China, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and the
USA. ITER will be constructed in Europe, at Cadarache in the South of
France and will provide 500 MW of fusion power.
Fusion is the energy source of the sun and the stars. On earth, fusion
research is aimed at demonstrating that this energy source can be used to
produce electricity in a safe and environmentally benign way, with
abundant fuel resources, to meet the needs of a growing world population.
For details of India’s role, see Nuclear India, Vol. 39, Nov. 11-12/
May-June 2006, issue available at Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)
website mentioned above.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 1 :
 Chapter One
ELECTRIC CHARGES
AND FIELDS
1.1  INTRODUCTION
All of us have the experience of seeing a spark or hearing a crackle when
we take off our synthetic clothes or sweater, particularly in dry weather.
Have you ever tried to find any explanation for this phenomenon? Another
common example of electric discharge is the lightning that we see in the
sky during thunderstorms. We also experience a sensation of an electric
shock either while opening the door of a car or holding the iron bar of a
bus after sliding from our seat. The reason for these experiences is
discharge of electric charges through our body, which were accumulated
due to rubbing of insulating surfaces. You might have also heard that
this is due to generation of static electricity. This is precisely the topic we
are going to discuss in this and the next chapter. Static means anything
that does not move or change with time. Electrostatics deals with
the study of forces, fields and potentials arising from
static charges.
1.2  ELECTRIC CHARGE
Historically the credit of discovery of the fact that amber rubbed with
wool or silk cloth attracts light objects goes to Thales of Miletus, Greece,
around 600 BC. The name electricity is coined from the Greek word
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 2 :
 2
Physics
elektron meaning amber. Many such pairs of materials were known which
on rubbing could attract light objects like straw, pith balls and bits of
papers.
It was observed that if two glass rods rubbed with wool or silk cloth
are brought close to each other, they repel each other [Fig. 1.1(a)]. The
two strands of wool or two pieces of silk cloth, with which the rods were
rubbed, also repel each other. However, the glass rod and wool attracted
each other. Similarly, two plastic rods rubbed with cat’s fur repelled each
other [Fig. 1.1(b)] but attracted the fur. On the other hand, the plastic
rod attracts the glass rod [Fig. 1.1(c)] and repel the silk or wool with
which the glass rod is rubbed. The glass rod repels the fur.
These seemingly simple facts  were established from years of efforts
and careful experiments and their analyses. It was concluded, after many
careful studies by different scientists, that there were only two kinds of
an entry which is called the electric charge. We say that the bodies like
glass or plastic rods, silk, fur and pith balls are electrified. They acquire
an electric charge on rubbing. There are two kinds of electrification and
we find  that (i) like charges repel and (ii) unlike charges attract each
other. The property which differentiates the two kinds of charges is called
the polarity of charge.
When a glass rod is rubbed with silk, the rod acquires one kind of
charge and the silk acquires the second kind of charge. This is true for
any pair of objects that are rubbed to be electrified. Now if the electrified
glass rod is brought in contact with silk, with which it was rubbed, they
no longer attract each other. They also do not attract or repel other light
objects as they did on being electrified.
Thus, the charges acquired after rubbing are lost when the charged
bodies are brought in contact. What can you conclude from these
observations? It just tells us that unlike charges acquired by the objects
neutralise or nullify each other’s effect. Therefore, the charges were named
as positive and negative by the American scientist Benjamin Franklin.
By convention, the charge on glass rod or cat’s fur is called positive and
that on plastic rod or silk is termed negative. If an object possesses an
electric charge, it is said to be electrified or charged. When it has no charge
it is said to be electrically neutral.
FIGURE 1.1 Rods: like charges repel and unlike charges attract each other.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 3 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
3
A simple apparatus to detect charge on a body is the gold-leaf
electroscope [Fig. 1.2(a)]. It consists of a vertical metal rod housed in a
box, with two thin gold leaves attached to its bottom end. When a charged
object touches the metal knob at the top of the rod, charge flows on to
the leaves and they diverge. The degree of divergance is an indicator of
the amount of charge.
Try to understand why material bodies acquire charge. You know that
all matter is made up of atoms and/or molecules. Although normally the
materials are electrically neutral,  they do contain charges; but their charges
are exactly balanced. Forces that hold the molecules together, forces that
hold atoms together in a solid, the adhesive force of glue, forces associated
with surface tension, all are basically electrical in nature, arising from the
forces between charged particles. Thus the electric force is all pervasive and
it encompasses almost each and every field associated with our life. It is
therefore essential that we learn more about such a force.
To electrify a neutral body, we need to add or remove one kind of
charge. When we say that a body is charged, we always refer to this
excess charge or deficit of charge. In solids,  some of the electrons, being
less tightly bound in the atom, are the charges which are transferred
from one body to the other.  A body can thus be charged positively by
losing some of its electrons. Similarly, a body can be charged negatively
by gaining electrons. When we rub a glass rod with silk, some of the
electrons from the rod are transferred to the silk cloth. Thus the rod gets
positively charged and the silk gets negatively charged. No new charge is
created in the process of rubbing. Also the number of electrons, that are
transferred, is a very small fraction of the total number of electrons in the
material body.
1.3  CONDUCTORS AND INSULATORS
Some substances readily allow passage of electricity through them, others
do not.  Those which allow electricity to pass through them easily are
called conductors. They have electric charges (electrons) that are
comparatively free to move inside the material. Metals, human and animal
bodies and earth are conductors. Most of the non-metals like glass,
porcelain, plastic, nylon, wood offer high resistance to the passage of
electricity through them. They are called insulators. Most  substances
fall into one of the two classes stated above*.
When some charge is transferred to a conductor, it readily gets
distributed over the entire surface of the conductor. In contrast, if some
charge is put on an insulator, it stays at the same place. You will learn
why this happens in the next chapter.
This property of the materials tells you why a nylon or plastic comb
gets electrified on combing dry hair or on rubbing, but a metal article
*
There is a third category called semiconductors, which offer resistance to the
movement of charges which is intermediate between the conductors and
insulators.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 4 :
 4
Physics
like spoon does not. The charges on metal leak through
our body to the ground as both are conductors of
electricity. However, if a metal rod with a wooden or plastic
handle is rubbed without touching its metal part, it shows
signs of charging.
1.4  BASIC PROPERTIES OF ELECTRIC
CHARGE
We have seen that there are two types of charges, namely
positive and negative and their effects tend to cancel each
other. Here,  we shall now describe some other properties
of the electric charge.
If the sizes of charged bodies are very small as
compared to the distances between them, we treat them
as point charges. All the charge content of the body is
assumed to be concentrated at one point in space.
1.4.1  Additivity of charges
We have not as yet given a quantitative definition of a
charge; we shall follow it up in the next section. We shall
tentatively assume that this can be done and proceed. If
a system contains two point charges q1 and q2, the total
charge of the system is obtained simply by adding
algebraically q1 and q2 , i.e., charges add up like real numbers or they
are scalars like the mass of a body. If a system contains n charges q1,
q2, q3, …, qn, then the total charge of the system is q1 + q2 + q3 + … + qn
.  Charge has  magnitude but no direction, similar to mass. However,
there is one difference between mass and charge. Mass of a body is
always positive whereas a charge can be either positive or negative.
Proper signs have to be used while adding the charges in a system. For
example, the total charge of a system containing five charges +1, +2, –3,
+4 and –5, in some arbitrary unit, is (+1) + (+2) + (–3) + (+4) + (–5) = –1 in
the same unit.
1.4.2  Charge is conserved
We have already  hinted to the fact that when bodies are charged by
rubbing, there is transfer of electrons from one body to the other; no new
charges are either created or destroyed. A picture of particles of electric
charge enables us to understand the idea of conservation of charge. When
we rub two bodies, what one body gains in charge the other body loses.
Within an isolated system consisting of many charged bodies, due to
interactions among the bodies, charges may get redistributed but it is
found that the total charge of the isolated system is always conserved.
Conservation of charge has been established experimentally.
It is not possible to create or destroy net charge carried by any isolated
system although the charge carrying particles may be created or destroyed
FIGURE 1.2 Electroscopes: (a)
The gold leaf electroscope, (b)
Schematics of a simple
electroscope.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 5 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
5
in a process. Sometimes nature creates charged particles: a neutron turns
into a proton and an electron. The proton and electron thus created have
equal and opposite charges and the total charge is zero before and after
the creation.
1.4.3  Quantisation of charge
Experimentally it is established that all free charges are integral multiples
of a basic unit of charge denoted by e. Thus charge q on a body is always
given by
q = ne
where n is any integer, positive or negative. This basic unit of charge is
the charge that an electron or proton carries. By convention, the charge
on an electron is taken to be negative; therefore charge on an electron is
written as –e and that on a proton as +e.
The fact that electric charge is always an integral multiple of e is termed
as quantisation of charge. There are a large number of situations in physics
where certain physical quantities are quantised. The quantisation of charge
was first suggested by the experimental laws of electrolysis discovered by
English experimentalist Faraday. It was experimentally demonstrated by
Millikan in 1912.
In the International System (SI) of Units, a unit of charge is called a
coulomb and is denoted by the symbol C. A coulomb is defined in terms
the unit of the electric current which you are going to learn in a
subsequent chapter. In terms of this definition, one coulomb is the charge
flowing through a wire in 1 s if the current is 1 A (ampere), (see Chapter 1
of Class XI, Physics Textbook , Part I). In this system, the value of the
basic unit of charge is
e = 1.602192 × 10–19 C
Thus, there are about 6 × 1018 electrons in a charge of  –1C. In
electrostatics, charges of this large magnitude are seldom encountered
and hence we use smaller units 1 mC (micro coulomb) = 10–6 C or 1 mC
(milli coulomb) = 10–3 C.
If the protons and electrons are the only basic charges in the
universe, all the observable charges have to be integral multiples of e.
Thus, if a body contains n1 electrons and n2 protons, the total amount
of charge on the body is n2 × e + n1 × (–e) = (n2 – n1) e. Since n1 and n2
are integers, their difference is also an integer. Thus the charge on any
body is always an integral multiple of e and can be increased or
decreased also in steps of e.
The step size e is, however, very small because at the macroscopic
level, we deal with charges of a few mC. At this scale the fact that charge of
a body can increase or decrease in units of e is not visible. In this respect,
the grainy nature of the charge is lost and it appears to be continuous.
This situation can be compared with the geometrical concepts of points
and lines. A dotted line viewed from a distance appears continuous to
us but is not continuous in reality. As many points very close to
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 6 :
 6
Physics
 EXAMPLE 1.2
 EXAMPLE 1.1
each other normally give an impression of a continuous line, many
small charges taken together appear as a continuous charge distribution.
At the macroscopic level, one deals with charges that are enormous
compared to the magnitude of charge e. Since e = 1.6 × 10–19 C, a charge
of magnituOde, say 1 mC, contains something like 1013 times the electronic
charge. At this scale, the fact that charge can increase or decrease only in
units of e is not very different from saying that charge can take continuous
values. Thus, at the macroscopic level, the quantisation of charge has no
practical consequence and can be ignored. However, at the microscopic
level, where the charges involved are of the order of a few tens or hundreds
of e, i.e., they can be counted, they appear in discrete lumps and
quantisation of charge cannot be ignored. It is the magnitude of scale
involved that is very important.
Example 1.1 If 109 electrons move out of a body to another body
every second, how much time is required to get a total charge of 1 C
on the other body?
Solution In one second 109 electrons move out of the body. Therefore
the charge given out in one second is 1.6 × 10–19 × 109 C = 1.6 × 10–10 C.
The time required to accumulate a charge of 1 C can then be estimated
to be 1 C ÷ (1.6 × 10–10 C/s) = 6.25 × 109 s = 6.25 × 109 ÷ (365  × 24 ×
3600) years = 198 years. Thus to collect a charge of one coulomb,
from a body from which 109 electrons move out every second, we will
need approximately 200 years. One coulomb is, therefore, a very large
unit for many practical purposes.
It is, however, also important to know what is roughly the number of
electrons contained in a piece of one cubic centimetre of a material.
A cubic piece of copper of side 1 cm contains about 2.5 × 1024
electrons.
Example 1.2 How much positive and negative charge is there in a
cup of water?
Solution Let us assume that the mass of one cup of water is
250 g. The molecular mass of water is 18g. Thus, one mole
(= 6.02 × 1023 molecules) of water is 18 g. Therefore the number of
molecules in one cup of water is (250/18) × 6.02 × 1023.
Each molecule of water contains two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen
atom, i.e., 10 electrons and 10 protons. Hence the total positive and
total negative charge has the same magnitude. It is equal to
(250/18) × 6.02 × 1023 × 10 × 1.6 × 10–19 C = 1.34 × 107 C.
1.5  COULOMB’S LAW
Coulomb’s law is a quantitative statement about the force between two
point charges. When the linear size of charged bodies are much smaller
than the distance separating them, the size may be ignored and the
charged bodies are treated as point charges. Coulomb measured the
force between two point charges and found that it varied inversely as
the square of the distance between the charges and was directly
proportional to the product of the magnitude of the two charges and
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 7 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
7
acted along the line joining the two charges. Thus, if two
point charges q1, q2 are separated by a distance r in vacuum,
the magnitude of the force (F) between them is given by
2
1
2
q
q
F
k
r
=
(1.1)
How did Coulomb arrive at this law from his experiments?
Coulomb used a torsion balance*  for measuring the force
between two charged metallic spheres. When the separation
between two spheres is much larger than the radius of each
sphere, the charged spheres may be regarded as point charges.
However, the charges on the spheres were unknown, to begin
with. How then could he discover a relation like Eq. (1.1)?
Coulomb thought of the following simple way: Suppose the
charge on a metallic sphere is q. If the sphere is put in contact
with an identical uncharged sphere, the charge will spread over
the two spheres. By symmetry, the charge on each sphere will
be q/2*. Repeating this process, we can get charges q/2, q/4,
etc. Coulomb varied the distance for a fixed pair of charges and
measured the force for different separations. He then varied the
charges in pairs, keeping the distance fixed for each pair.
Comparing forces for different pairs of charges at different
distances, Coulomb arrived at the relation, Eq. (1.1).
Coulomb’s law, a simple mathematical statement,  was
initially experimentally arrived at  in the manner described
above. While the original experiments established it at a
macroscopic scale, it has also been established down to
subatomic level  (r ~ 10–10 m).
Coulomb discovered his law without knowing the explicit
magnitude of the charge. In fact, it is the other way round:
Coulomb’s law can now be employed to furnish a definition
for a unit of charge. In the relation, Eq. (1.1), k is so far
arbitrary. We can choose any positive value of k. The choice
of k determines the size of the unit of charge. In SI units, the
value of k is about 9 × 109 
2
2
Nm
C
. The unit of charge that
results from this choice is called a coulomb which we defined
earlier in Section 1.4. Putting this value of k in Eq. (1.1), we
see that for q1 = q2 = 1 C, r = 1 m
F = 9 × 109 N
That is, 1 C is the charge that when placed at a distance
of 1 m from another charge of the same magnitude in vacuum
experiences an electrical force of repulsion of magnitude
*
A torsion balance is a sensitive device to measure force. It was also used later
by Cavendish to measure the very feeble gravitational force between two objects,
to verify Newton’s Law of Gravitation.
*
Implicit in this is the assumption of additivity of charges and conservation:
two charges (q/2 each) add up to make a total charge q.
Charles Augustin de
Coulomb (1736 – 1806)
Coulomb, a French
physicist, began his
career as a military
engineer in the West
Indies. In 1776, he
returned to Paris and
retired to a small estate
to do his scientific
research. He invented a
torsion 
balance 
to
measure the quantity of
a force and used it for
determination of forces
of electric attraction or
repulsion between small
charged spheres. He
thus arrived in 1785 at
the inverse square law
relation, now known as
Coulomb’s law. The law
had been anticipated by
Priestley and also by
Cavendish 
earlier,
though 
Cavendish
never published his
results. Coulomb also
found 
the 
inverse
square law of force
between unlike and like
magnetic poles.
CHARLES AUGUSTIN DE COULOMB  (1736 –1806)
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 8 :
 8
Physics
9 × 109 N. One coulomb is evidently too big a unit to
be used. In practice, in electrostatics, one uses
smaller units like 1 mC or 1 mC.
The constant k in Eq. (1.1) is usually put as
k = 1/4pe0 for later convenience, so that Coulomb’s
law is written as
0
1
2
2
1
4
q q
F
r
ε
=
π
(1.2)
e0 is called the permittivity of free space . The value
of e0 in SI units is
0
= 8.854 × 10–12 C2 N–1m–2
Since force is a vector, it is better to write
Coulomb’s law in the vector notation. Let the position
vectors of charges q1 and q2 be r1 and r2 respectively
[see Fig.1.3(a)]. We denote force on q1 due to q2 by
F12 and force on q2 due to q1 by F21. The two point
charges q1 and q2 have been numbered 1 and 2 for
convenience and the vector leading from 1 to 2 is
denoted by r21:
r21 = r2 – r1
In the same way, the vector leading from 2 to 1 is denoted by r12:
r12 = r1 – r2 = – r21
The magnitude of the vectors r21 and r12 is denoted by r21 and r12,
respectively (r12 = r21). The direction of a vector is specified by a unit
vector along the vector. To denote the direction from 1 to 2 (or from 2 to
1), we define the unit vectors:
ɵ
21
21
21
= r
r
r
, ɵ
ɵ
ɵ
12
12
21
12
12
,
=
−
r
r
r
r
r
Coulomb’s force law between two point charges q1 and q2 located at
r1 and r2, respectively is then expressed as
ɵ
1
2
21
21
2
21
1
4
ε
=
π
F
r
o
q
q
r
(1.3)
Some remarks on Eq. (1.3) are relevant:
·
Equation (1.3) is valid for any sign of q1 and q2 whether positive or
negative. If q1 and q2 are of the same sign (either both positive or both
negative), F21 is along ˆr 21, which denotes repulsion, as it should be for
like charges. If q1 and q2 are of opposite signs, F21 is along – ɵr 21(= ɵr 12),
which denotes attraction, as expected for unlike charges. Thus, we do
not have to write separate equations for the cases of like and unlike
charges. Equation (1.3) takes care of both cases correctly [Fig. 1.3(b)].
FIGURE 1.3 (a) Geometry and
(b) Forces between charges.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 9 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
9
 EXAMPLE 1.3
Interactive animation on Coulomb’s law:
http://webphysics.davidson.edu/physlet_resources/bu_semester2/menu_semester2.html
·
The force F12  on charge q1 due to charge q2, is obtained from Eq. (1.3),
by simply interchanging 1 and 2, i.e.,
1
2
12
12
21
2
0
12
1
ˆ
4
ε
=
= −
π
F
r
F
q
q
r
Thus, Coulomb’s law agrees with the Newton’s third law.
·
Coulomb’s law [Eq. (1.3)] gives the force between two charges q1 and
q2 in vacuum. If the charges are placed in matter or the intervening
space has matter, the situation gets complicated due to the presence
of charged constituents of matter. We shall consider electrostatics in
matter in the next chapter.
Example 1.3 Coulomb’s law for electrostatic force between two point
charges and Newton’s law for gravitational force between two stationary
point masses, both have inverse-square dependence on the distance
between the charges and masses respectively. (a) Compare the strength
of these forces by determining the ratio of their magnitudes (i) for an
electron and a proton and (ii) for two protons. (b) Estimate the
accelerations of electron and proton due to the electrical force of their
mutual attraction when they are 1 Å (= 10-10 m) apart? (mp = 1.67 ×
10–27 kg, me = 9.11 × 10–31 kg)
Solution
(a) (i) The electric force between an electron and a proton at a distance
r apart is:
2
2
0
1
4
e
e
F
r
ε
= −
π
where the negative sign indicates that the force is attractive. The
corresponding gravitational force (always attractive) is:
2
p
e
G
m
m
F
G
r
= −
where mp and me are the masses of a proton and an electron
respectively.
2
39
0
2.4
10
4
e
G
p
e
F
e
F
Gm m
ε
=
=
×
π
(ii) On similar lines, the ratio of the magnitudes of electric force
to the gravitational force between two protons at a distance r
apart is:
F
F
e
Gm m
e
G
p
p
=
=
2
0
4πε
 1.3 × 1036
However, it may be mentioned here that the signs of the two forces
are different. For two protons,  the gravitational force is attractive
in nature and the Coulomb force is repulsive. The actual values
of these forces between two protons inside a nucleus (distance
between two protons is ~ 10-15 m inside a nucleus) are Fe ~ 230 N,
whereas, FG ~ 1.9 × 10–34 N.
The (dimensionless) ratio of the two forces shows that electrical
forces are enormously stronger than the gravitational forces.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 10 :
 10
Physics
 (b) The electric force F exerted by a proton on an electron is same in
magnitude to the force exerted by an electron on a proton; however,
the masses of an electron and a proton are different. Thus, the
magnitude of force is
|F| = 
1
4
0
2
2
πε
e
r
 = 8.987 × 109 Nm2/C2 × (1.6 ×10–19C)2 / (10–10m)2
        = 2.3 × 10–8 N
Using Newton’s second law of motion, F = ma, the acceleration
that an electron will undergo is
a = 2.3×10–8 N / 9.11 ×10–31 kg = 2.5 × 1022 m/s2
Comparing this with the value of acceleration due to gravity, we
can conclude that the effect of gravitational field is negligible on
the motion of electron and it undergoes very large accelerations
under the action of Coulomb force due to a proton.
The value for acceleration of the proton is
2.3 × 10–8 N / 1.67 × 10–27 kg = 1.4 × 1019 m/s2
 EXAMPLE 1.3
FIGURE 1.4
Example 1.4 A charged metallic sphere A is suspended by a nylon
thread. Another charged metallic sphere B held by an insulating
 EXAMPLE 1.4
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 11 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
11
 EXAMPLE 1.4
handle is brought close to A such that the distance between their
centres is 10 cm, as shown in Fig. 1.4(a). The resulting repulsion of A
is noted (for example, by shining a beam of light and measuring the
deflection of its shadow on a screen). Spheres A and B are touched
by uncharged spheres C and D respectively, as shown in Fig. 1.4(b).
C and D are then removed and B is brought closer to A to a
distance of 5.0 cm between their centres, as shown in Fig. 1.4(c).
What is the expected repulsion of A on the basis of Coulomb’s law?
Spheres A and C and spheres B and D have identical sizes. Ignore
the sizes of A and B in comparison to the separation between their
centres.
Solution Let the original charge on sphere A be q and that on B be
q¢. At a distance r between their centres, the magnitude of the
electrostatic force on each is given by
F
qq
r
=
′
1
4
0
2
πε
neglecting the sizes of spheres A and B in comparison to r. When an
identical but uncharged sphere C touches A, the charges redistribute
on A and C and, by symmetry, each sphere carries a charge q/2.
Similarly, after D touches B, the redistributed charge on each is
q¢/2. Now, if the separation between A and B is halved, the magnitude
of the electrostatic force on each is
′ =
′
=
′ =
F
q
q
r
qq
r
F
1
4
2
2
2
1
4
0
2
0
2
π
π
ε
ε
( / )(
/ )
( / )
(
)
Thus the electrostatic force on A, due to B, remains unaltered.
1.6  FORCES BETWEEN MULTIPLE CHARGES
The mutual electric force between two charges is given by
Coulomb’s law. How to calculate the force on a charge where
there are not one but several charges around? Consider a
system of n stationary charges q1, q2, q3, ..., qn in vacuum.
What is the force on q1 due to q2, q3, ..., qn? Coulomb’s law is
not enough to answer this question.  Recall that forces of
mechanical origin add according to the parallelogram law of
addition. Is the same true for forces of electrostatic origin?
Experimentally, it is verified that force on any charge due
to a number of other charges is the vector sum of all the forces
on that charge due to the other charges, taken one at a time.
The individual forces are unaffected due to the presence of
other charges. This is termed as the principle of superposition.
To better understand the concept, consider a system of
three charges q1, q2 and q3, as shown in Fig. 1.5(a). The force
on one charge, say q1, due to two other charges q2, q3 can
therefore be obtained by performing a vector addition of the
forces due to each one of these charges. Thus, if the force on q1
due to q2 is denoted by F12, F12 is given by Eq. (1.3)  even
though other charges are present.
Thus,
F12 =
1
4
0
1
2
12
2
12
πε
q q
r
ˆr
FIGURE 1.5 A system of
(a) three charges
(b) multiple charges.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 12 :
 12
Physics
 EXAMPLE 1.5
In the same way, the force on q1 due to q3, denoted by F13, is given by
F
r
13
0
1
3
13
2
13
1
4
=
πε
q q
r
ˆ
which again is the Coulomb force on q1 due to q3, even though other
charge q2 is present.
Thus the total force F1 on q1 due to the two charges q2 and q3 is
given as
F
F
F
r
r
1
12
13
0
1
2
12
2
12
0
1
3
13
2
13
1
4
1
4
=
+
=
+
π
π
ε
ε
q q
r
q q
r
ˆ
ˆ
(1.4)
The above calculation of force can be generalised to a system of
charges more than three, as shown in Fig. 1.5(b).
The principle of superposition says that in a system of charges q1,
q2, ..., qn, the force on q1 due to q2 is the same as given by Coulomb’s law,
i.e., it is unaffected by the presence of the other charges q3, q4, ..., qn. The
total force F1 on the charge q1, due to all other charges, is then given by
the vector sum of the forces F12, F13, ...,  F1n:
i.e.,
F
F
F
F
r
r
1
12
13
1n
 =  
 + 
 + ...+  
=
+
1
4
0
1
2
12
2
12
1
3
13
2
13
πε
q q
r
q q
r
ˆ
ˆ
+
+






...
ˆ
q q
r
n
n
n
1
1
2
1r
=
=∑
q
q
r
i
i
i
n
i
1
0
1
2
2
1
4πε
ˆr
(1.5)
The vector sum is obtained as usual by the parallelogram law of
addition of vectors. All of electrostatics is basically a consequence of
Coulomb’s law and the superposition principle.
Example 1.5 Consider three charges q1, q2, q3 each equal to q at the
vertices of an equilateral triangle of side l. What is the force on a
charge Q (with the same sign as q) placed at the centroid of the
triangle, as shown in Fig. 1.6?
FIGURE 1.6
Solution In the given equilateral triangle ABC of sides of length l, if
we draw a perpendicular AD to the side BC,
AD = AC cos 30º = ( 3 /2 ) l  and the distance AO of the centroid O
from A is (2/3) AD = (1/ 3 ) l. By symmatry AO = BO = CO.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 13 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
13
 EXAMPLE 1.5
Thus,
Force F1 on Q due to charge q at A  = 
3
4
0
2
πε
Qq
l
 along AO
Force F2 on Q due to charge q at B  = 
3
4
0
2
πε
Qq
l
 along BO
Force F3 on Q due to charge q at C  = 
3
4
0
2
πε
Qq
l
 along CO
The resultant of forces F2 and F3 is 
3
4
0
2
πε
Qq
l
 along OA, by the
parallelogram law. Therefore, the total force on Q = 
3
4
0
2
πε
Qq
l
ˆ
ˆ
r
r
−
(
)
 = 0, where ˆr
is the unit vector along OA.
It is clear also by symmetry that the three forces will sum to zero.
Suppose that the resultant force was non-zero but in some direction.
Consider what would happen if the system was rotated through 60°
about O.
Example 1.6 Consider the charges q, q, and –q placed at the vertices
of an equilateral triangle, as shown in Fig. 1.7. What is the force on
each charge?
FIGURE 1.7
Solution  The forces acting on charge q at A due to charges q at B
and –q at C are F12 along BA and F13 along AC respectively, as shown
in Fig. 1.7. By the parallelogram law, the total force F1 on the charge
q at A is given by
F1 = F 
1ˆr  where 
1ˆr  is a unit vector along BC.
The force of attraction or repulsion for each pair of charges has the
same magnitude F
q
=
2
0
2
4 π ε l
The total force F2 on charge q at B is thus F2 = F ˆr 2, where ˆr 2 is a
unit vector along AC.
 EXAMPLE 1.6
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 14 :
 14
Physics
 EXAMPLE 1.6
Similarly the total force on charge –q at C is F3  = 
3  F ˆn , where ˆn is
the unit vector along the direction bisecting the ÐBCA.
It is interesting to see that the sum of the forces on the three charges
is zero, i.e.,
F1 + F2 + F3 = 0
The result is not at all surprising. It follows straight from the fact
that Coulomb’s law is consistent with Newton’s third law. The proof
is left to you as an exercise.
1.7  ELECTRIC FIELD
Let us consider a point charge Q placed in vacuum, at the origin O. If we
place another point charge q at a point P, where OP = r, then the charge Q
will exert a force on q as per Coulomb’s law. We may ask the question: If
charge q is removed, then what is left in the surrounding? Is there
nothing? If there is nothing at the point P, then how does a force act
when we place the charge q at P. In order to answer such questions, the
early scientists introduced the concept of field. According to this, we say
that the charge Q produces an electric field everywhere in the surrounding.
When another charge q is brought at some point P, the field there acts on
it and produces a force. The electric field produced by the charge Q  at a
point r is given as
E r
r
r
( ) =
=
1
4
1
4
0
2
0
2
π
π
ε
ε
Q
r
Q
r
ˆ
ˆ
(1.6)
where ˆ =
r
 r/r, is a unit vector from the origin to the point r. Thus, Eq.(1.6)
specifies the value of the electric field for each value of the position
vector r. The word “field” signifies how some distributed quantity (which
could be a scalar or a vector) varies with position. The effect of the charge
has been incorporated in the existence of the electric field. We obtain the
force F exerted by a charge Q on a charge q, as
F
r
=
1
4
0
2
πε
Qq
r
ˆ
(1.7)
Note that the charge q also exerts an equal and opposite force on the
charge Q. The electrostatic force between the charges Q and q can be
looked upon as an interaction between charge q and the electric field of
Q and vice versa. If we denote the position of charge q by the vector r, it
experiences a force F equal to the charge q multiplied by the electric
field E at the location of q. Thus,
F(r) = q E(r)
(1.8)
Equation (1.8) defines the SI unit of electric field as N/C*.
Some important remarks may be made here:
(i)
From Eq. (1.8), we can infer that if q is unity, the electric field due to
a charge Q is numerically equal to the force exerted by it. Thus, the
electric field due to a charge Q at a point in space may be defined
as the force that a unit positive charge would experience if placed
*
An alternate unit V/m will be introduced in the next chapter.
FIGURE 1.8 Electric
field (a) due to a
charge Q, (b) due to a
charge –Q.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 15 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
15
at that point. The charge Q, which is producing the electric field, is
called a source charge and the charge q, which tests the effect of a
source charge, is called a test charge. Note that the source charge Q
must remain at its original location. However, if a charge q is brought
at any point around Q, Q itself is bound to experience an electrical
force due to q and will tend to move. A way out of this difficulty is to
make q negligibly small. The force F is then negligibly small but the
ratio F/q is finite and defines the electric field:
E
F
=




→
lim
q
q
0
(1.9)
A practical way to get around the problem (of keeping Q undisturbed
in the presence of q) is to hold Q to its location by unspecified forces!
This may look strange but actually this is what happens in practice.
When we are considering the electric force on a test charge q due to a
charged planar sheet (Section 1.14), the charges on the sheet are held to
their locations by the forces due to the unspecified charged constituents
inside the sheet.
(ii) Note that the electric field E due to Q, though defined operationally in
terms of some test charge q, is independent of q. This is because
F is proportional to q, so the ratio F/q does not depend on q. The
force F on the charge q due to the charge Q depends on the particular
location of charge q which may take any value in the space around
the charge Q. Thus, the electric field E due to Q is also dependent on
the space coordinate r. For different positions of the charge q all over
the space, we get different values of electric field E. The field exists at
every point in three-dimensional space.
(iii) For a positive charge, the electric field will be directed radially
outwards from the charge. On the other hand, if the source charge is
negative, the electric field vector, at each point, points radially inwards.
(iv) Since the magnitude of the force F on charge q due to charge Q
depends only on the distance r of the charge q from charge Q,
the magnitude of the electric field E will also depend only on the
distance r. Thus at equal distances from the charge Q, the magnitude
of its electric field E is same. The magnitude of electric field E due to
a point charge is thus same on a sphere with the point charge at its
centre; in other words, it has a spherical symmetry.
1.7.1  Electric field due to a system of charges
Consider a system of charges q1, q2, ..., qn with  position vectors r1,
r2, ..., rn relative  to some origin O. Like the electric field at a point in
space due to a single charge, electric field at a point in space due to the
system of charges is defined to be the force experienced by a unit
test charge placed at that point, without disturbing the original
positions of charges q1, q2, ..., qn. We can use Coulomb’s law and the
superposition principle to determine this field at a point P denoted by
position vector r.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 16 :
 16
Physics
Electric field E1 at r due to q1 at r1 is given by
E1 = 
1
4
0
1
1
2
πε
q
r P
1P
ˆr
where 
1P
ˆr  is a unit vector in the direction from q1 to P,
and r1P is the distance between q1 and P.
In the same manner, electric field E2 at r due to q2 at
r2 is
E2 = 
1
4
0
2
2
2
πε
q
r P
2P
ˆr
where 
2P
ˆr
 is a unit vector in the direction from q2 to P
and r2P is the distance between q2 and P. Similar
expressions hold good for fields E3, E4, ..., En due to
charges q3, q4, ..., qn.
By the superposition principle, the electric field E at r
due to the system of charges is (as shown in Fig. 1.9)
E(r)  =  E1 (r) +  E2 (r)  + …  +  En(r)
        =
1
4
1
4
1
4
0
1
1
2
1
0
2
2
2
2
0
2
π
π
π
ε
ε
ε
q
r
q
r
q
r
n
n
n
P
P
P
P
P
P
ˆ
ˆ
...
ˆ
r
r
r
+
+
+
E(r) =
=∑
 
1
4
0
P
i P
πε
q
r
i
i
i
n
2
1
ˆr
(1.10)
E is a vector quantity that varies from one point to another point in space
and is determined from the positions of the source charges.
1.7.2  Physical significance of electric field
You may wonder why the notion of electric field has been introduced
here at all. After all, for any system of charges, the measurable quantity
is the force on a charge which can be directly determined using Coulomb’s
law and the superposition principle [Eq. (1.5)]. Why then introduce this
intermediate quantity called the electric field?
For electrostatics, the concept of electric field is convenient, but not
really necessary. Electric field is an elegant way of characterising the
electrical environment of a system of charges. Electric field at a point in
the space around a system of charges tells you the force a unit positive
test charge would experience if placed at that point (without disturbing
the system). Electric field is a characteristic of the system of charges and
is independent of the test charge that you place at a point to determine
the field. The term field in physics generally refers to a quantity that is
defined at every point in space and may vary from point to point. Electric
field is a vector field, since force is a vector quantity.
The true physical significance of the concept of electric field, however,
emerges only when we go beyond electrostatics and deal with time-
dependent electromagnetic phenomena. Suppose we consider the force
between two distant charges q1, q2 in accelerated motion. Now the greatest
speed with which a signal or information can go from one point to another
is c, the speed of light. Thus, the effect of any motion of q1 on q2 cannot
FIGURE 1.9 Electric field at a point
due to a system of charges is the
vector sum of the electric fields at
the point due to individual charges.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 17 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
17
arise instantaneously. There will be some time delay between the effect
(force on q2) and the cause (motion of q1). It is precisely here that the
notion of electric field (strictly, electromagnetic field) is natural and very
useful. The field picture is this: the accelerated motion of charge q1
produces electromagnetic waves, which then propagate with the speed
c, reach q2 and cause a force on q2. The notion of field elegantly accounts
for the time delay. Thus, even though electric and magnetic fields can be
detected only by their effects (forces) on charges, they are regarded as
physical entities, not merely mathematical constructs. They have an
independent dynamics of their own,  i.e., they evolve according to laws
of their own. They can also transport energy. Thus, a source of time-
dependent electromagnetic fields, turned on for a short interval of time
and then switched off, leaves behind propagating electromagnetic fields
transporting energy. The concept of field was first introduced by Faraday
and is now among the central concepts in physics.
Example 1.7 An electron falls through a distance of 1.5 cm in a
uniform electric field of magnitude 2.0 × 104 N C–1 [Fig. 1.10(a)]. The
direction of the field is reversed keeping its magnitude unchanged
and a proton falls through the same distance [Fig. 1.10(b)]. Compute
the time of fall in each case. Contrast the situation with that of ‘free
fall under gravity’.
FIGURE 1.10
Solution In Fig. 1.10(a) the field is upward, so the negatively charged
electron experiences a downward force of magnitude eE where E is
the magnitude of the electric field. The acceleration of the electron is
ae  =  eE/me
where me is the mass of the electron.
Starting from rest, the time required by the electron to fall through a
distance h is given by  
2
2
e
e
e
h m
h
t
a
e E
=
=
For e = 1.6 × 10–19C, me = 9.11 × 10–31 kg,
     E = 2.0 × 104 N C–1, h = 1.5 × 10–2 m,
  te = 2.9 × 10–9s
In Fig. 1.10 (b), the field is downward, and the positively charged
proton experiences a downward force of magnitude eE. The
acceleration of the proton is
ap  =  eE/mp
where mp is the mass of the proton; mp = 1.67 × 10–27 kg. The time of
fall for the proton is
 EXAMPLE 1.7
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 18 :
 18
Physics
 EXAMPLE 1.8
 EXAMPLE 1.7
–7
2
2
1 3 10
s
p
p
p
h m
h
t
.
a
e E
=
=
=
×
Thus, the heavier particle (proton) takes a greater time to fall through
the same distance. This is in basic contrast to the situation of ‘free
fall under gravity’ where the time of fall is independent of the mass of
the body. Note that in this example we have ignored the acceleration
due to gravity in calculating the time of fall. To see if this is justified,
let us calculate the acceleration of the proton in the given electric
field:
p
p
e E
a
m
=
     
19
4
1
27
(1 6
10
C)
(2 0
10
N C
)
1 67
10
kg
.
.
.
−
−
−
×
×
×
=
×
     
12
–2
1 9
10
m s
.
=
×
which is enormous compared to the value of g (9.8 m s–2), the
acceleration due to gravity. The acceleration of the electron is even
greater. Thus, the effect of acceleration due to gravity can be ignored
in this example.
Example 1.8 Two point charges q1 and q2, of magnitude +10–8 C and
–10–8 C, respectively, are placed 0.1 m apart. Calculate the electric
fields at points A, B and C shown in Fig. 1.11.
FIGURE 1.11
Solution The electric field vector E1A at A due to the positive charge
q1 points towards the right and has a magnitude
9
2
-2
8
1A
2
(9
10 Nm C )
(10
C)
(0.05m)
E
−
×
×
=
 =  3.6 × 104  N C–1
The electric field vector E2A at A due to the negative charge q2 points
towards the right and has the same magnitude. Hence the magnitude
of the total electric field EA at A is
EA = E1A + E2A = 7.2 × 104 N C–1
EA is directed toward the right.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 19 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
19
The electric field vector E1B at B due to the positive charge q1 points
towards the left and has a magnitude
9
2
–2
8
1B
2
(9
10 Nm C
)
(10
C)
(0.05 m)
E
−
×
×
=
= 3.6 × 104 N C–1
The electric field vector E2B at B due to the negative charge q2 points
towards the right and has a magnitude
9
2
–2
8
2B
2
(9
10 Nm C
)
(10
C)
(0.15 m)
E
−
×
×
=
=  4 × 103  N C–1
The magnitude of the total electric field at B is
EB = E1B –  E2B = 3.2 × 104 N C–1
EB is directed towards the left.
The magnitude of each electric field vector at point C, due to charge
q1 and q2 is
     
9
2
–2
8
1C
2C
2
(9
10 Nm C
)
(10
C)
(0.10 m)
E
E
−
×
×
=
=
 =  9 × 103  N C–1
The directions in which these two vectors point are indicated in
Fig. 1.11. The resultant of these two vectors is
1
2
cos
cos
3
3
π
π
=
+
C
c
c
E
E
E
=  9 × 103  N C–1
EC points towards the right.
1.8  ELECTRIC FIELD LINES
We have studied electric field in the last section. It is a vector quantity
and can be represented as we represent vectors. Let us try to represent E
due to a point charge pictorially. Let the point charge be placed at the
origin. Draw vectors pointing along the direction of the
electric field with their lengths proportional to the strength
of the field at each point. Since the magnitude of electric
field at a point decreases inversely as the square of the
distance of that point from the charge, the vector gets
shorter as one goes away from the origin, always pointing
radially outward. Figure 1.12 shows such a picture.  In
this figure, each arrow indicates the electric field, i.e., the
force acting on a unit positive charge, placed at the tail of
that arrow.  Connect the arrows pointing in one direction
and the resulting figure represents a field line. We thus
get many field lines, all pointing outwards from the point
charge. Have we lost the information about the strength
or magnitude of the field now, because it was contained
in the length of the arrow? No. Now the magnitude of the
field is represented by the density of field lines. E is strong
near the charge, so the density of field lines is more near
the charge and the lines are closer. Away from the charge,
the field gets weaker and the density of field lines is less,
resulting in well-separated lines.
Another person may draw more lines. But the number of lines is not
important. In fact, an infinite number of lines can be drawn in any region.
FIGURE 1.12 Field of a point charge.
 EXAMPLE 1.8
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 20 :
 20
Physics
It is the relative density of lines in different regions which is
important.
We draw the figure on the plane of paper, i.e., in two-
dimensions but we live in three-dimensions. So if one wishes
to estimate the density of field lines, one has to consider the
number of lines per unit cross-sectional area, perpendicular
to the lines.  Since the electric field decreases as the square of
the distance from a point charge and the area enclosing the
charge increases as the square of the distance, the number
of field lines crossing the enclosing area remains constant,
whatever may be the distance of the area from the charge.
We started by saying that the field lines carry information
about the direction of electric field at different points in space.
Having drawn a certain set of field lines, the relative density
(i.e., closeness) of the field lines at different points indicates
the relative strength of electric field at those points. The field
lines crowd where the field is strong and are spaced apart
where it is weak. Figure 1.13 shows a set of field lines. We
can imagine two equal and small elements of area placed at points R and
S normal to the field lines there. The number of field lines in our picture
cutting the area elements is proportional to the magnitude of field at
these points. The picture shows that the field at R is stronger than at S.
To understand the dependence of the field lines on the area, or rather
the solid angle subtended by an area element, let us try to relate the
area with the solid angle, a generalisation of angle to three dimensions.
Recall how a (plane) angle is defined in two-dimensions. Let a small
transverse line element Dl be placed at a distance r from a point O. Then
the angle subtended by Dl  at O can be approximated as Dq = Dl/r.
Likewise, in three-dimensions the solid angle* subtended by a small
perpendicular plane area DS, at a distance r, can be written as
DW = DS/r2. We know that in a given solid angle the number of radial
field lines is the same. In Fig. 1.13, for two points P1 and P2 at distances
r1 and r2 from the charge, the element of area subtending the solid angle
DW is 
2
1r DW at P1 and an element of area 
2
2r DW at P2, respectively. The
number of lines (say n) cutting these area elements are the same. The
number of field lines, cutting unit area element is therefore n/(
2
1r DW) at
P1 and n/(
2
2r DW) at P2, respectively. Since n and DW are common, the
strength of the field clearly has a 1/r 2 dependence.
The picture of field lines was invented by Faraday to develop an
intuitive non-mathematical way of visualising electric fields around
charged configurations. Faraday called them lines of force. This term is
somewhat misleading, especially in case of magnetic fields. The more
appropriate term is field lines (electric or magnetic) that we have
adopted in this book.
Electric field lines are thus a way of pictorially mapping the electric
field around a configuration of charges. An electric field line is, in general,
FIGURE 1.13  Dependence of
electric field strength on the
distance and its relation to the
number of field lines.
*
Solid angle is a measure of a cone. Consider the intersection of the given cone
with a sphere of radius R. The solid angle DW of the cone is defined to be equal
to DS/R
2, where DS is the area on the sphere cut out by the cone.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 21 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
21
a curve drawn in such a way that the tangent to it at each
point is in the direction of the net field at that point. An
arrow on the curve is obviously necessary to specify the
direction of electric field from the two possible directions
indicated by a tangent to the curve. A field line is a space
curve, i.e., a curve in three dimensions.
Figure 1.14 shows the field lines around some simple
charge configurations. As mentioned earlier, the field lines
are in 3-dimensional space, though the figure shows them
only in a plane. The field lines of a single positive charge
are radially outward while those of a single negative
charge are radially inward. The field lines around a system
of two positive charges (q, q) give a vivid pictorial
description of their mutual repulsion, while those around
the configuration of two equal and opposite charges
(q, –q), a dipole, show clearly the mutual attraction
between the charges. The field lines follow some important
general properties:
(i)
Field lines start from positive charges and end at
negative charges. If there is a single charge, they may
start or end at infinity.
(ii) In a charge-free region, electric field lines can be taken
to be continuous curves without any breaks.
(iii) Two field lines can never cross each other. (If they did,
the field at the point of intersection will not have a
unique direction, which is absurd.)
(iv) Electrostatic field lines do not form any closed loops.
This follows from the conservative nature of electric
field (Chapter 2).
1.9  ELECTRIC FLUX
Consider flow of a liquid with velocity v, through a small
flat surface dS, in a direction normal to the surface. The
rate of flow of liquid is given by the volume crossing the
area per unit time  v dS and represents the flux of liquid
flowing across the plane. If the normal to the surface is
not parallel to the direction of flow of liquid, i.e., to v, but
makes an angle q with it, the projected area in a plane
perpendicular to v is δ dS cos q. Therefore, the flux going
out of the surface dS is v. ˆn dS. For the case of  the electric
field, we define an analogous quantity and call it electric
flux. We should, however, note that there is no flow of a
physically observable quantity unlike the case of
liquid flow.
In the picture of electric field lines described above,
we saw that the number of field lines crossing a unit area,
placed normal to the field at a point is a measure of the
strength of electric field at that point. This means that if
FIGURE 1.14 Field lines due to
some simple charge configurations.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 22 :
 22
Physics
we place a small planar element of area DS
normal to E at a point, the number of field lines
crossing it is proportional* to E DS. Now
suppose we tilt the area element by angle q.
Clearly, the number of field lines crossing the
area element will be smaller. The projection of
the area element normal to E is DS cosq. Thus,
the number of field lines crossing DS is
proportional to E DS cosq. When q = 90°, field
lines will be parallel to DS and will not cross it
at all (Fig. 1.15).
The orientation of area element and not
merely its magnitude is important in many
contexts. For example, in a stream, the amount
of water flowing through a ring will naturally
depend on how you hold the ring. If you hold
it normal to the flow, maximum water will flow
through it than if you hold it with some other
orientation. This shows that an area element
should be treated as a vector. It has a
magnitude and also a direction. How to specify the direction of a planar
area? Clearly, the normal to the plane specifies the orientation of the
plane. Thus the direction of a planar area vector is along its normal.
How to associate a vector to the area of a curved surface? We imagine
dividing the surface into a large number of very small area elements.
Each small area element may be treated as planar and a vector associated
with it, as explained before.
Notice one ambiguity here. The direction of an area element is along
its normal. But a normal can point in two directions. Which direction do
we choose as the direction of the vector associated with the area element?
This problem is resolved by some convention appropriate to the given
context. For the case of a closed surface, this convention is very simple.
The vector associated with every area element of a closed surface is taken
to be in the direction of the outward normal. This is the convention used
in Fig. 1.16. Thus, the area element vector DS at a point on a closed
surface equals DS ˆn  where DS is the magnitude of the area element and
ˆn  is a unit vector in the direction of outward normal at that point.
We now come to the definition of electric flux. Electric flux Df through
an area element DS is defined by
Df = E.DS = E DS  cosq
(1.11)
which, as seen before, is proportional to the number of field lines cutting
the area element. The angle q here is the angle between E and DS. For a
closed surface, with the convention stated already, q is the angle between
E and the outward normal   to the area element. Notice we could look at
the expression E DS cosq  in two ways:  E (DS cosq ) i.e., E times the
FIGURE 1.15 Dependence of flux on the
inclination q between E and ˆn .
FIGURE 1.16
Convention for
defining normal
ˆn  and DS.
*
It will not be proper to say that the number of field lines is equal to EDS. The
number of field lines is after all, a matter of how many field lines we choose to
draw. What is physically significant is the relative number of field lines crossing
a given area at different points.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 23 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
23
projection of area normal to E,  or E^ DS, i.e., component of E along the
normal to the area element times the magnitude of the area element. The
unit of electric flux is N C–1 m2.
The basic definition of electric flux given by Eq. (1.11) can be used, in
principle, to calculate the total flux through any given surface. All we
have to do is to divide the surface into small area elements, calculate the
flux at each element and add them up. Thus, the total flux f through a
surface S is
f ~ S E.DS
(1.12)
The approximation sign is put because the electric field E is taken to
be constant over the small area element. This is mathematically exact
only when you take the limit DS ® 0  and the sum in Eq. (1.12) is written
as an integral.
1.10  ELECTRIC DIPOLE
An electric dipole is a pair of equal and opposite point charges q and –q,
separated by a distance 2a. The line connecting the two charges defines
a direction in space. By convention, the direction from –q to q is said to
be the direction of the dipole. The mid-point of locations of –q and q is
called the centre of the dipole.
The total charge of the electric dipole is obviously zero. This does not
mean that the field of the electric dipole is zero. Since the charge q and
–q are separated by some distance, the electric fields due to them, when
added, do not exactly cancel out. However, at distances much larger than
the separation of the two charges forming a dipole (r >> 2a), the fields
due to q and –q nearly cancel out. The electric field due to a dipole
therefore falls off, at large distance, faster than like 1/r 2 (the dependence
on r of the field due to a single charge q). These qualitative ideas are
borne out by the explicit calculation as follows:
1.10.1  The field of an electric dipole
The electric field of the pair of charges (–q and q) at any point in space
can be found out from Coulomb’s law and the superposition principle.
The results are simple for the following two cases: (i) when the point is on
the dipole axis, and (ii) when it is in the equatorial plane of the dipole,
i.e.,  on a plane perpendicular to the dipole axis through its centre.  The
electric field at any general point P is obtained by adding the electric
fields E–q due to the charge –q and E+q due to the charge q, by the
parallelogram law of vectors.
(i) For points on the axis
Let the point P be at distance r from the centre of the dipole on the side of
the charge q,  as shown in Fig. 1.17(a). Then
E
p
−
= −
+
q
q
r
a
4
0
2
πε (
)

[1.13(a)]
where ˆp  is the unit vector along the dipole axis (from –q to q). Also
E
p
+
=
−
q
q
r
a
4
0
2
π ε (
)

[1.13(b)]
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 24 :
 24
Physics
The total field at P is
E
E
E
p
=
+
=
−
−
+






+
−
q
q
q
r
a
r
a
4
1
1
0
2
2
π ε
(
)
(
)

    =
−
q
a r
r
a
o
4
4
2
2 2
π ε
(
)
p
(1.14)
For r >> a
E
p
=
4
4
0
3
q a
r
πε
ˆ                (r >> a)
(1.15)
(ii) For points on the equatorial plane
The magnitudes of the electric fields due to the two
charges +q and –q are given by
E
q
r
a
q
+
=
+
4
1
0
2
2
πε
[1.16(a)]
E
q
r
a
q
–
=
+
4
1
0
2
2
πε
[1.16(b)]
and are equal.
The directions of  E+q and E–q are as shown in
Fig. 1.17(b). Clearly, the components normal to the dipole
axis cancel away. The components along the dipole axis
add up. The total electric field is opposite to ˆp. We have
E = – (E +q + E –q ) cosq  ˆp
= −
+
2
4
2
2 3
2
q a
r
a
o
π ε (
)

/
p
(1.17)
At large distances (r >> a), this reduces to
E
p
= −
>>
2
4
3
q a
r
r
a
o
π ε
ˆ
(
)
(1.18)
From Eqs. (1.15) and (1.18), it is clear that the dipole field at large
distances does not involve q and a separately; it depends on the product
qa. This suggests the definition of dipole moment. The dipole moment
vector p of an electric dipole is defined by
p  = q × 2a ˆp
(1.19)
that is, it is a vector whose magnitude is charge q times the separation
2a (between the pair of charges q, –q) and the direction is along the line
from –q to q. In terms of p, the electric field of a dipole at large distances
takes simple forms:
At a point on the dipole axis
E
p
=
2
4
3
πεor
(r >> a)
(1.20)
At a point on the equatorial plane
E
p
= −4
3
πεor
(r >> a)
(1.21)
FIGURE 1.17 Electric field of a dipole
at (a) a point on the axis, (b) a point
on the equatorial plane of the dipole.
p is the dipole moment vector of
magnitude p = q × 2a  and
directed from –q to q.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 25 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
25
 EXAMPLE 1.9
 Notice the important point that the dipole field at large distances
falls off not as 1/r 2 but as1/r 3. Further,  the magnitude and the direction
of the dipole field depends not only on the distance r but also on the
angle between the position vector r and the dipole moment p.
We can think of the limit when the dipole size 2a approaches zero,
the charge q approaches infinity in such a way that the product
p = q × 2a is finite. Such a dipole is referred to as a point dipole. For a
point dipole, Eqs. (1.20) and (1.21) are exact, true for any r.
1.10.2  Physical significance of dipoles
In most molecules, the centres of positive charges and of negative charges*
lie at the same place. Therefore, their dipole moment is zero. CO2 and
CH4 are of this type of molecules. However, they develop a dipole moment
when an electric field is applied. But in some molecules, the centres of
negative charges and of positive charges do not coincide. Therefore they
have a permanent electric dipole moment, even in the absence of an electric
field. Such molecules are called polar molecules. Water molecules, H2O,
is an example of this type. Various materials give rise to interesting
properties and important applications in the presence or  absence of
electric field.
Example 1.9 Two charges ±10 mC are placed 5.0 mm apart. Determine
the electric field at (a) a point P on the axis of the dipole 15 cm away
from its centre O on the side of the positive charge, as shown in Fig.
1.18(a), and (b) a point Q, 15 cm away from O on a line passing through
O and normal to the axis of the dipole, as shown in Fig. 1.18(b).
FIGURE 1.18
*
Centre of a collection of positive point charges is defined much the same way
as the centre of mass: r
r
cm =
∑
∑
q
q
i i
i
i
i
.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 26 :
 26
Physics
 EXAMPLE 1.9
Solution  (a) Field at P due to charge +10 mC
= 
5
12
2
1
2
10
C
4 (8.854 10
C N
m
)
−
−
−
−
π
×
2
4
2
1
(15
0.25)
10
m
−
×
−
×
=  4.13 × 106  N C–1  along BP
Field at P due to charge –10 mC
–5
12
2
1
2
10
C
4 (8.854 10
C N
m
)
−
−
−
=
π
×
 
2
4
2
1
(15
0.25)
10
m
−
×
+
×
=  3.86 × 106  N C–1 along PA
The resultant electric field at P due to the two charges at A and B is
=  2.7 × 105  N C–1  along BP.
In this example, the ratio OP/OB is quite large (= 60). Thus, we can
expect to get approximately the same result as above by directly using
the formula for electric field at a far-away point on the axis of a dipole.
For a dipole consisting of charges ± q, 2a distance apart, the electric
field at a distance r from the centre on the axis of the dipole has a
magnitude
E
p
r
=
2
4
0
3
πε
(r/a >> 1)
where p = 2a q is the magnitude of the dipole moment.
The direction of electric field on the dipole axis is always along the
direction of the dipole moment vector (i.e., from –q to q). Here,
p =10–5 C × 5 × 10–3 m  = 5 × 10–8 C m
Therefore,
E  =
8
12
2
1
2
2
5 10
C m
4 (8.854 10
C N
m
)
−
−
−
−
×
×
π
×
3
6
3
1
(15)
10
m
−
×
×
 = 2.6 × 105  N C–1
along the dipole moment direction AB, which is close to the result
obtained earlier.
(b) Field at Q due to charge + 10 mC at B
=
5
12
2
1
2
10
C
4
(8.854
10
C
N
m
)
−
−
−
−
π
×
2
2
4
2
1
[15
(0.25) ]
10
m
−
+
×
×
=  3.99 × 106  N C–1 along BQ
Field at Q due to charge –10 mC at A
=
5
12
2
1
2
10
C
4
(8.854 10
C N
m
)
−
−
−
−
π
×
2
2
4
2
1
[15
(0.25) ] 10
m
−
+
×
×
=  3.99 × 106  N C–1 along QA.
Clearly, the components of these two forces with equal magnitudes
cancel along the direction OQ but add up along the direction parallel
to BA. Therefore, the resultant electric field at Q due to the two
charges at A and B is
= 2 × 
6
–1
2
2
0.25
3.99
10 N C
15
(0.25)
×
×
+
along BA
=  1.33 × 105  N C–1 along BA.
As in (a), we can expect to get approximately the same result by
directly using the formula for dipole field at a point on the normal to
the axis of the dipole:
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 27 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
27
 EXAMPLE 1.9
E
p
r
= 4
3
π
0ε
(r/a >> 1)
8
12
2
–1
–2
5 10
Cm
4
(8.854 10
C N
m
)
−
−
×
=
π
×
3
6
3
1
(15)
10
m
−
×
×
=  1.33 × 105  N C–1.
The direction of electric field in this case is opposite to the direction
of the dipole moment vector. Again, the result agrees with that obtained
before.
1.11  DIPOLE IN A UNIFORM EXTERNAL FIELD
Consider a permanent dipole of dipole moment p in a uniform
external field E, as shown in Fig. 1.19. (By permanent dipole, we
mean that p exists  irrespective of E; it has not been induced by E.)
There is a force qE on q and a force –qE on –q. The net force on
the dipole is zero, since E is uniform. However, the charges are
separated, so the forces act at different points, resulting in a torque
on the dipole. When the net force is zero, the torque (couple) is
independent of the origin. Its magnitude equals the magnitude of
each force multiplied by the arm of the couple (perpendicular
distance between the two antiparallel forces).
Magnitude of torque = q E × 2 a sinq
       = 2 q a E sinq
Its direction is normal to the plane of the paper, coming out of it.
The magnitude of p × E is also p E sinq and its direction
is normal to the paper, coming out of it. Thus,
ttttt  = p × E
(1.22)
This torque will tend to align the dipole with the field
E. When p is aligned with E, the torque is zero.
What happens if the field is not uniform? In that case,
the net force will evidently be non-zero. In addition there
will, in general, be a torque on the system as before. The
general case is involved, so let us consider the simpler
situations when p is parallel to E or antiparallel to E. In
either case, the net torque is zero, but there is a net force
on the dipole if E is not uniform.
Figure 1.20 is self-explanatory. It is easily seen that
when p is parallel to E, the dipole has a net force in the
direction of increasing field. When p is antiparallel to E,
the net force on the dipole is in the direction of decreasing
field. In general, the force depends on the orientation of p
with respect to E.
This brings us to a common observation in frictional
electricity. A comb run through dry hair attracts pieces of
paper. The comb, as we know, acquires charge through
friction. But the paper is not charged. What then explains
the attractive force? Taking the clue from the preceding
FIGURE 1.19 Dipole in a
uniform electric field.
FIGURE 1.20 Electric force on a
dipole: (a) E parallel to p, (b)  E
antiparallel to p.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 28 :
 28
Physics
discussion, the charged comb ‘polarises’ the piece of paper, i.e., induces
a net dipole moment in the direction of field. Further, the electric field
due to the comb is not uniform. This non-uniformity of the field makes a
dipole to experience a net force on it. In this situation, it is easily seen
that the paper should move in the direction of the comb!
1.12  CONTINUOUS CHARGE DISTRIBUTION
We have so far dealt with charge configurations involving discrete charges
q1, q2, ..., qn. One reason why we restricted to discrete charges is that the
mathematical treatment is simpler and does not involve calculus. For
many purposes, however, it is impractical to work in terms of discrete
charges and we need to work with continuous charge distributions. For
example, on the surface of a charged conductor, it is impractical to specify
the charge distribution in terms of the locations of the microscopic charged
constituents. It is more feasible to consider an area element DS (Fig. 1.21)
on the surface of the conductor (which is very small on the macroscopic
scale but big enough to include a very large number of electrons) and
specify the charge DQ on that element. We then define a surface charge
density s at the area element by
Q
S
σ
∆
= ∆
(1.23)
We can do this at different points on the conductor and thus arrive at
a continuous function s, called the surface charge density. The surface
charge density s  so defined ignores the quantisation of charge and the
discontinuity in charge distribution at the microscopic level*. s  represents
macroscopic surface charge density, which in a sense, is a smoothed out
average of the microscopic charge density over an area element DS which,
as said before, is large microscopically but small macroscopically. The
units for s are C/m2.
Similar considerations apply for a line charge distribution and a volume
charge distribution. The linear charge density l of a wire is defined by
Q
l
λ
∆
=
∆
(1.24)
where Dl is a small line element of wire on the macroscopic scale that,
however, includes a large number of microscopic charged constituents,
and DQ is the charge contained in that line element. The units for l are
C/m. The volume charge density (sometimes simply called charge density)
is defined in a similar manner:
Q
V
ρ
∆
= ∆
(1.25)
where DQ is the charge included in the macroscopically small volume
element DV that includes a large number of microscopic charged
constituents. The units for r are C/m3.
The notion of continuous charge distribution is similar to that we
adopt for continuous mass distribution in mechanics. When we refer to
FIGURE 1.21
Definition of linear,
surface and volume
charge densities.
In each case, the
element (Dl, DS, DV)
chosen is small on
the macroscopic
scale but contains
a very large number
of microscopic
constituents.
*
At the microscopic level, charge distribution is discontinuous, because they are
discrete charges separated by intervening space where there is no charge.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 29 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
29
the density of a liquid, we are referring to its macroscopic density. We
regard it as a continuous fluid and ignore its discrete molecular
constitution.
The field due to a continuous charge distribution can be obtained in
much the same way as for a system of discrete charges, Eq. (1.10). Suppose
a continuous charge distribution in space has a charge density r. Choose
any convenient origin O and let the position vector of any point in the
charge distribution be r. The charge density r may vary from point to
point, i.e., it is a function of r. Divide the charge distribution into small
volume elements of size DV. The charge in a volume element DV is rDV.
Now, consider any general point P (inside or outside the distribution)
with position vector R (Fig. 1.21). Electric field due to the charge rDV is
given by Coulomb’s law:
2
0
1
ˆ
4
V
'
r'
ρ
ε
∆
∆
=
π
E
r
(1.26)
where r¢ is the distance between the charge element and P, and  ˆr¢ is a
unit vector in the direction from the charge element to P. By the
superposition principle, the total electric field due to the charge
distribution is obtained by summing over electric fields due to different
volume elements:
2
0
1
ˆ
4
all
V
V
'
r'
ρ
ε
∆
∆
≅
Σ
π
E
r
(1.27)
Note that r, r¢,  ˆ′r  all can vary from point to point. In a strict
mathematical method, we should let DV®0 and the sum then becomes
an integral; but we omit that discussion here, for simplicity. In short,
using Coulomb’s law and the superposition principle, electric field can
be determined for any charge distribution, discrete or continuous or part
discrete and part continuous.
1.13  GAUSS’S LAW
As a simple application of the notion of electric flux, let us consider the
total flux through a sphere of radius r, which encloses a point charge q
at its centre. Divide the sphere into small area elements, as shown in
Fig. 1.22.
The flux through an area element DS is
2
0
ˆ
4
q
r
φ
ε
∆
=
∆
=
∆
π
E
S
r
S
i
i
(1.28)
where we have used Coulomb’s law for the electric field due to a single
charge q. The unit vector ˆr is along the radius vector from the centre to
the area element. Now, since the normal to a sphere at every point is
along the radius vector at that point, the area element DS and ˆr  have
the same direction. Therefore,
2
0
4
q
S
r
φ
ε
∆
=
∆
π
(1.29)
since the magnitude of a unit vector is 1.
The total flux through the sphere is obtained by adding up flux
through all the different area elements:
FIGURE 1.22 Flux
through a sphere
enclosing a point
charge q at its centre.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 30 :
 30
Physics
2
0
4
all
S
q
S
r
φ
ε
∆
=
Σ
∆
π
Since each area element of the sphere is at the same
distance r from the charge,
2
2
0
4
4
all
S
o
q
q
S
S
r
r
φ
ε
ε
∆
=
Σ ∆
=
π
π
Now S, the total area of the sphere, equals 4pr 2. Thus,
2
2
0
0
4
4
q
q
r
r
φ
ε
ε
=
×
π
=
π
(1.30)
Equation (1.30) is a simple illustration of a general result of
electrostatics called Gauss’s law.
We state Gauss’s law without proof:
Electric flux through a closed surface S
= q/e0
(1.31)
q = total charge enclosed by S.
The law implies that the total electric flux through a closed surface is
zero if no charge is enclosed by the surface. We can see that explicitly in
the simple situation of Fig. 1.23.
Here the electric field is uniform and we are considering a closed
cylindrical surface, with its axis parallel to the uniform field E. The total
flux f  through the surface is  f = f1 + f2 + f3, where f1 and f2 represent
the flux through the surfaces 1 and 2 (of circular cross-section) of the
cylinder and f3 is the flux through the curved cylindrical part of the
closed surface. Now the normal to the surface 3 at every point is
perpendicular to E, so by definition of flux, f3 = 0. Further, the outward
normal to 2 is along E while the outward normal to 1 is opposite to E.
Therefore,
f1 = –E S1,     f2 = +E S2
S1 = S2 = S
where S is the area of circular cross-section. Thus, the total flux is zero,
as expected by Gauss’s law. Thus, whenever you find that the net electric
flux through a closed surface is zero, we conclude that the total charge
contained in the closed surface is zero.
The great significance of Gauss’s law Eq. (1.31), is that it is true in
general, and not only for the simple cases we have considered above. Let
us note some important points regarding this law:
(i)
Gauss’s law is true for any closed surface, no matter what its shape
or size.
(ii) The term q on the right side of Gauss’s law, Eq. (1.31), includes the
sum of all charges enclosed by the surface. The charges may be located
anywhere inside the surface.
(iii) In the situation when the surface is so chosen that there are some
charges inside and some outside, the electric field [whose flux appears
on the left side of Eq. (1.31)] is due to all the charges, both inside and
outside S. The term q on the right side of Gauss’s law, however,
represents only the total charge inside S.
FIGURE 1.23 Calculation of the
flux of uniform electric field
through the surface of a cylinder.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 31 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
31
 EXAMPLE 1.10
(iv) The surface that we choose for the application of Gauss’s law is called
the Gaussian surface. You may choose any Gaussian surface and
apply Gauss’s law. However, take care not to let the Gaussian surface
pass through any discrete charge. This is because electric field due
to a system of discrete charges is not well defined at the location of
any charge. (As you go close to the charge, the field grows without
any bound.) However, the Gaussian surface can pass through a
continuous charge distribution.
(v) Gauss’s law is often useful towards a much easier calculation of the
electrostatic field when the system has some symmetry. This is
facilitated by the choice of a suitable Gaussian surface.
(vi) Finally, Gauss’s law is based on the inverse square dependence on
distance contained in the Coulomb’s law. Any violation of Gauss’s
law will indicate departure from the inverse square law.
Example 1.10 The electric field components in Fig. 1.24 are
Ex = ax1/2, Ey = Ez = 0, in which a = 800 N/C m1/2. Calculate (a) the
flux through the cube, and (b) the charge within the cube. Assume
that a = 0.1 m.
FIGURE 1.24
Solution
(a) Since the electric field has only an x component, for faces
perpendicular to x direction, the angle between E and DS is
± p/2. Therefore, the flux  f = E.DS is separately zero for each face
of the cube except the two shaded ones. Now the magnitude of
the electric field at the left face is
EL = ax1/2 = aa1/2
(x = a at the left face).
The magnitude of electric field at the right face is
ER = a x1/2 = a (2a)1/2
(x = 2a at the right face).
The corresponding fluxes are
fL= EL.DS = 
ˆ
L
L
S
∆
E
n
⋅
=EL DS cosq = –EL DS, since q = 180°
   = –ELa2
fR= ER.DS = ER DS cosq  = ER DS,   since q = 0°
   = ERa2
Net flux through the cube
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 32 :
 32
Physics
 EXAMPLE 1.11
 EXAMPLE 1.10
= fR + fL = ERa2 – ELa2 = a2 (ER – EL) = aa2 [(2a)1/2 – a1/2]
=  aa5/2 (
)
2 – 1
=  800 (0.1)5/2 (
)
2 – 1
= 1.05 N m2 C–1
(b) We can use Gauss’s law to find the total charge q inside the cube.
We have f = q/e0 or q = fe0. Therefore,
  q = 1.05 × 8.854 × 10–12 C = 9.27 × 10–12 C.
Example 1.11 An electric field is uniform, and in the positive x
direction for positive x, and uniform with the same magnitude but in
the negative x direction for negative x. It is given that E = 200 ˆi   N/C
for x > 0 and E = –200 ˆi  N/C for x < 0. A right circular cylinder of
length 20 cm and radius 5 cm has its centre at the origin and its axis
along the x-axis so that one face is at x = +10 cm and the other is at
x = –10 cm (Fig. 1.25). (a) What is the net outward flux through each
flat face? (b) What is the flux through the side of the cylinder?
(c) What is the net outward flux through the cylinder? (d) What is the
net charge inside the cylinder?
Solution
(a)
We can see from the figure that on the left face E and DS are
parallel. Therefore, the outward flux is
fL= E.DS = – 200 ˆ ∆
i
S
i
=  + 200 DS, since  ˆ ∆
i
S
i
= – DS
=  + 200 × p (0.05)2 = + 1.57 N m2 C–1
On the right face, E and DS are parallel and therefore
fR =  E.DS =  + 1.57 N m2 C–1.
(b)
For any point on the side of the cylinder E is perpendicular to
DS and hence E.DS = 0. Therefore, the flux out of the side of the
cylinder is zero.
(c)
Net outward flux through the cylinder
f = 1.57 + 1.57 + 0 = 3.14 N m2 C–1
FIGURE 1.25
 (d) The net charge within the cylinder can be found by using Gauss’s
law which gives
q =  e0f
   =  3.14 × 8.854 × 10–12  C
   =  2.78 × 10–11 C
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 33 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
33
1.14  APPLICATIONS OF GAUSS’S LAW
The electric field due to a general charge distribution is, as seen above,
given by Eq. (1.27). In practice, except for some special cases, the
summation (or integration) involved in this equation cannot be carried
out to give electric field at every point in
space. For some symmetric charge
configurations, however, it is possible to
obtain the electric field in a simple way using
the Gauss’s law. This is best understood by
some examples.
1.14.1
Field due to an infinitely
long straight uniformly
charged wire
Consider an infinitely long thin straight wire
with uniform linear charge density l. The wire
is obviously an axis of symmetry. Suppose we
take the radial vector from O to P and rotate it
around the wire. The points P, P¢, P¢¢ so
obtained are completely equivalent with
respect to the charged wire. This implies that
the electric field must have the same magnitude
at these points. The direction of electric field at
every point must be radial (outward if l > 0,
inward if l < 0). This is clear from Fig. 1.26.
Consider a pair of line elements P1 and P2
of the wire, as shown. The electric fields
produced by the two elements of the pair when
summed give a resultant electric field which
is radial (the components normal to the radial
vector cancel). This is true for any such pair
and hence the total field at any point P is
radial. Finally, since the wire is infinite,
electric field does not depend on the position
of P along the length of the wire. In short, the
electric field is everywhere radial in the plane
cutting the wire normally, and its magnitude
depends only on the radial distance r.
To calculate the field, imagine a cylindrical
Gaussian surface, as shown in the Fig. 1.26(b).
Since the field is everywhere radial, flux
through the two ends of the cylindrical
Gaussian surface is zero. At the cylindrical
part of the surface, E is normal to the surface
at every point, and its magnitude is constant,
since it depends only on r. The surface area
of the curved part is  2prl, where l is the length
of the cylinder.
FIGURE 1.26 (a) Electric field due to an
infinitely long thin straight wire is radial,
(b) The Gaussian surface for a long thin
wire of uniform linear charge density.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 34 :
 34
Physics
Flux through the Gaussian surface
=
flux through the curved cylindrical part of the surface
=
E × 2prl
The surface includes charge equal to l l. Gauss’s law then gives
E × 2prl = ll/e0
i.e.,E  = 
0
2
r
λ
ε
π
Vectorially, E at any point is given by
0
ˆ
2
r
λ
ε
=
π
E
n
(1.32)
where ˆn  is the radial unit vector in the plane normal to the wire passing
through the point. E is directed outward if l is positive and inward if l is
negative.
Note that when we write a vector A as a scalar multiplied by a unit
vector, i.e., as A = A ˆa , the scalar A is  an algebraic number. It can be
negative or positive. The direction of A will be the same as that of the unit
vector ˆa if A > 0 and opposite to ˆa  if A < 0. When we want to restrict to
non-negative values, we use the symbol A and call it the modulus of A.
Thus, 
0
≥
A
.
Also note that though only  the charge enclosed by the surface (ll)
was included above, the electric field E is due to the charge on the entire
wire. Further, the assumption that the wire is infinitely long is crucial.
Without this assumption, we cannot take E to be normal to the curved
part of the cylindrical Gaussian surface. However, Eq. (1.32) is
approximately true for electric field around the central portions of a long
wire, where the end effects may be ignored.
1.14.2  Field due to a uniformly charged infinite plane sheet
Let s be the uniform surface charge density of an infinite plane sheet
(Fig. 1.27). We take the x-axis normal to the given plane. By symmetry,
the electric field will not depend on y and z coordinates and its direction
at every point must be parallel to the x-direction.
We can take the Gaussian surface to be a
rectangular parallelepiped of cross-sectional area
A, as shown. (A cylindrical surface will also do.) As
seen from the figure, only the two faces 1 and 2 will
contribute to the flux; electric field lines are parallel
to the other faces and they, therefore, do not
contribute to the total flux.
The unit vector normal to surface 1 is in –x
direction while  the unit  vector normal to surface 2
is in the +x direction. Therefore, flux  E.DS through
both the surfaces are equal and add up. Therefore
the net flux through the Gaussian surface is 2 EA.
The charge enclosed by the closed surface is sA.
Therefore by Gauss’s law,
FIGURE 1.27 Gaussian surface for a
uniformly charged infinite plane sheet.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 35 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
35
2 EA = sA/e0
or,  E = s/2e0
Vectorically,
0
ˆ
2
σ
ε
=
E
n
(1.33)
where ˆn  is a unit vector normal to the plane and going away from it.
E is directed away from the plate if s  is positive and toward the plate
if s is negative. Note that the above application of the Gauss’ law has
brought out an additional fact: E is independent of x also.
For a finite large planar sheet, Eq. (1.33) is approximately true in the
middle regions of the planar sheet, away from the ends.
1.14.3  Field due to a uniformly charged thin spherical shell
Let s be the uniform surface charge density of a thin spherical shell of
radius R (Fig. 1.28). The situation has obvious spherical symmetry. The
field at any point P, outside or inside, can depend only on r (the radial
distance from the centre of the shell to the point) and must be radial (i.e.,
along the radius vector).
(i) Field outside the shell: Consider a point P outside the
shell with radius vector r. To calculate E at P, we take the
Gaussian surface to be a sphere of radius r and with centre
O, passing through P. All points on this sphere are equivalent
relative to the given charged configuration. (That is what we
mean by spherical symmetry.) The electric field at each point
of the Gaussian surface, therefore, has the same magnitude
E and is along the radius vector at each point. Thus, E and
DS at every point are parallel and the flux through each
element is E DS. Summing over all DS, the flux through the
Gaussian surface is E × 4 p r 2. The charge enclosed is
s × 4 p R 2. By Gauss’s law
E × 4 p r 2 = 
2
0
4
R
σ
ε
π
Or,  
2
2
2
0
0
4
R
q
E
r
r
σ
ε
ε
=
=
π
where q  =  4 p R2 s is the total charge on the spherical shell.
Vectorially,
2
0
ˆ
4
q
r
ε
=
π
E
r
(1.34)
The electric field is directed outward if q > 0 and inward if
q < 0. This, however, is exactly the field produced by a charge
q placed at the centre O. Thus for points outside the shell, the field due
to a uniformly charged shell is as if  the entire charge of the shell is
concentrated at its centre.
(ii) Field inside the shell: In Fig. 1.28(b), the point P is inside the
shell. The Gaussian surface is again a sphere through P centred at O.
FIGURE 1.28 Gaussian
surfaces for a point with
(a) r > R, (b) r < R.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 36 :
 36
Physics
 EXAMPLE 1.12
The flux through the Gaussian surface, calculated as before, is
E × 4 p r2. However, in this case, the Gaussian surface encloses no
charge. Gauss’s law then gives
E × 4 p r2 =  0
i.e., E = 0          (r < R )
(1.35)
that is, the field due to a uniformly charged thin shell is zero at all points
inside the shell*. This important result is a direct consequence of Gauss’s
law which follows from Coulomb’s law. The experimental verification of
this result confirms the 1/r2 dependence in Coulomb’s law.
Example 1.12 An early model for an atom considered it to have a
positively charged point nucleus of charge Ze, surrounded by a
uniform density of negative charge up to a radius R. The atom as a
whole is neutral. For this model, what is the electric field at a distance
r from the nucleus?
FIGURE 1.29
Solution  The charge distribution for this model of the atom is as
shown in Fig. 1.29. The total negative charge in the uniform spherical
charge distribution of radius R must be –Z e, since the atom (nucleus
of charge Z e + negative charge) is neutral. This immediately gives us
the negative charge density r, since we must have
3
4
0–
3
R
Ze
ρ
π
=
or
3
3
4
Ze
R
ρ = −
π
To find the electric field E(r) at a point P which is a distance r away
from the nucleus, we use Gauss’s law. Because of the spherical
symmetry of the charge distribution, the magnitude of the electric
field E(r) depends only on the radial distance, no matter what the
direction of r. Its direction is along (or opposite to) the radius vector r
from the origin to the point P. The obvious Gaussian surface is a
spherical surface centred at the nucleus. We consider two situations,
namely, r < R and r > R.
(i) r < R : The electric flux f enclosed by the spherical surface is
    f  =  E (r) × 4 p r 2
*
Compare this with a uniform mass shell discussed in Section 7.5 of Class XI
Textbook of Physics.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 37 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
37
 EXAMPLE 1.12
where E (r)  is the magnitude of the electric field at r. This is because
the field at any point on the spherical Gaussian surface has the
same direction as the normal to the surface there,  and has the same
magnitude at all points on the surface.
The charge q enclosed by the Gaussian surface is the positive nuclear
charge and the negative charge within the sphere of radius r,
i.e., 
3
4
3
r
q
Z e
ρ
π
=
+
Substituting for the charge density r  obtained earlier, we have
3
3
r
q
Z e
Z e
R
=
−
Gauss’s law then gives,
2
3
0
1
( )
;
4
Z e
r
E r
r
R
r
R
ε
 
 
=
−
<
 
 
 
 
π
The electric field is directed radially outward.
(ii) r > R:  In this case, the total charge enclosed by the Gaussian
spherical surface is zero since the atom is neutral. Thus, from Gauss’s
law,
E (r) × 4 p  r 2 = 0  or  E (r) = 0;    r > R
At r = R, both cases give the same result: E = 0.
SUMMARY
1.
Electric and magnetic forces determine the properties of atoms,
molecules and bulk matter.
2.
From simple experiments on frictional electricity, one can infer that
there are two types of charges in nature; and that like charges repel
and unlike charges attract. By convention, the charge on a glass rod
rubbed with silk is positive; that on a plastic rod rubbed with fur is
then negative.
3.
Conductors allow movement of electric charge through them,
insulators do not. In metals, the mobile charges are electrons; in
electrolytes both positive and negative ions are mobile.
4.
Electric charge has three basic properties: quantisation, additivity
and conservation.
Quantisation of electric charge means that total charge (q) of a body
is always an integral multiple of a basic quantum of charge (e) i.e.,
q = n e, where n = 0, ±1, ±2, ±3, .... Proton and electron have charges
+e, –e, respectively. For macroscopic charges for which n is a very large
number, quantisation of charge can be ignored.
Additivity of electric charges means that the total charge of a system
is the algebraic sum (i.e., the sum taking into account proper signs)
of all individual charges in the system.
Conservation of electric charges means that the total charge of an
isolated system remains unchanged with time. This means that when
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 38 :
 38
Physics
bodies are charged through friction, there is a transfer of electric charge
from one body to another, but no creation or destruction
of charge.
5.
Coulomb’s Law: The mutual electrostatic force between two point
charges q1 and q2 is proportional to the product q1q2 and inversely
proportional to the square of the distance r21 separating them.
Mathematically,
F21 = force on q2 due to  
1
2
1
21
2
21
ˆ
k
(q q )
q
r
=
r
where 
21
ˆr
 is a unit vector in the direction from q1 to q2 and k =  
0
1
4 ε
π
is the constant of proportionality.
In SI units, the unit of charge is coulomb. The experimental value of
the constant e0 is
e0 = 8.854 × 10–12 C2 N–1 m–2
The approximate value of k is
k = 9 × 109 N m2 C–2
6.
The ratio of electric force and gravitational force between a proton
and an electron is
2
39
2 4
10
e
p
k e
.
G
m m
≅
×
7.
Superposition Principle: The principle is based on the property that the
forces with which two charges attract or repel each other are not
affected by the presence of a third (or more) additional charge(s). For
an assembly of charges q1, q2, q3, ..., the force on any charge, say q1, is
the vector sum of the force on  q1 due to q2, the force on q1 due to q3,
and so on. For each pair, the force is given by the Coulomb’s law for
two charges stated earlier.
8.
The electric field E at a point due to a charge configuration is the
force on a small positive test charge q placed at the point divided by
the magnitude of the charge. Electric field due to a point charge q has
a magnitude |q|/4pe0r2; it is radially outwards from q, if q is positive,
and radially inwards if q is negative. Like Coulomb force, electric field
also satisfies superposition principle.
9.
An electric field line is a curve drawn in such a way that the tangent
at each point on the curve gives the direction of electric field at that
point. The relative closeness of field lines indicates the relative strength
of electric field at different points; they crowd near each other in regions
of strong electric field and are far apart where the electric field is
weak. In regions of constant electric field, the field lines are uniformly
spaced parallel straight lines.
10. Some of the important properties of field lines are: (i) Field lines are
continuous curves without any breaks. (ii) Two field lines cannot cross
each other. (iii) Electrostatic field lines start at positive charges and
end at negative charges —they cannot form closed loops.
11. An electric dipole is a pair of equal and opposite charges q and –q
separated by some distance 2a. Its dipole moment vector p has
magnitude 2qa and is in the direction of the dipole axis from –q to q.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 39 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
39
12. Field of an electric dipole in its equatorial plane (i.e., the plane
perpendicular to its axis and passing through its centre) at a distance
r from the centre:
2
2 3/2
1
4
(
)
o
a
r
ε
−
=
π
+
p
E
3 ,
4
o
for r
a
r
ε
−
≅
>>
π
p
Dipole electric field on the axis at a distance r from the centre:
2
2 2
0
2
4
(
)
r
r
a
ε
=
π
−
p
E
3
0
2
4
for
r
a
r
ε
≅
>>
π
p
The 1/r3 dependence of dipole electric fields should be noted in contrast
to the 1/r 2 dependence of electric field due to a point charge.
13. In a uniform electric field E, a dipole experiences a torque τ  given by
τ  = p × E
but experiences no net force.
14. The flux Df of electric field E through a small area element DS is
given by
 Df  = E.DS
The vector area element DS is
DS = DS ˆn
where DS is the magnitude of the area element and ˆn  is normal to the
area element, which can be considered planar for sufficiently small DS.
For an area element of a closed surface, ˆn  is taken to be the direction
of outward normal, by convention.
15. Gauss’s law: The flux of electric field through any closed surface S is
1/e0 times the total charge enclosed by S. The law is especially useful
in determining electric field E, when the source distribution has simple
symmetry:
(i) Thin infinitely long straight wire of uniform linear charge density l
0
ˆ
2
r
λ
ε
=
π
E
n
where r is the perpendicular distance of the point from the wire and
ˆn is the radial unit vector in the plane normal to the wire passing
through the point.
(ii) Infinite thin plane sheet of uniform surface charge density s
0
ˆ
2
σ
ε
=
E
n
where ˆn  is a unit vector normal to the plane, outward on either side.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 40 :
 40
Physics
(iii) Thin spherical shell of uniform surface charge density s
2
0
ˆ
(
)
4
q
r
R
r
ε
=
≥
π
E
r
E = 0
     (r   <   R)
where r is the distance of the point from the centre of the shell and R
the radius of the shell. q is the total charge of the shell:  q = 4pR2s.
The electric field outside the shell is as though the total charge is
concentrated at the centre. The same result is true for a solid sphere
of uniform volume charge density. The field is zero at all points inside
the shell.
Physical quantity
Symbol
Dimensions
Unit
Remarks
Vector area element
D S
[L2]
m2
DS = DS ˆn
Electric field
E
[MLT–3A–1]
V m–1
Electric flux
f
[ML3 T–3A–1]
V m
Df  =  E.DS
Dipole moment
p
[LTA]
C m
Vector directed
from negative to
positive charge
Charge density:
linear
l
[L–1 TA]
C m–1
 Charge/length
surface
s
[L–2 TA]
C m–2
Charge/area
volume
r
[L–3 TA]
C m–3
Charge/volume
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
You might wonder why the protons, all carrying positive charges,
are compactly residing inside the nucleus. Why do they not fly away?
You will learn that there is a third kind of a fundamental force,
called the strong force which holds them together. The range of
distance where this force is effective is, however, very small ~10-14
m. This is precisely the size of the nucleus. Also the electrons are
not allowed to sit on top of the protons, i.e. inside the nucleus,
due to the laws of quantum mechanics. This gives the atoms their
structure as they exist in nature.
2.
Coulomb force and gravitational force follow the same inverse-square
law. But gravitational force has only one sign (always attractive), while
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 41 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
41
Coulomb force can be of both signs (attractive and repulsive), allowing
possibility of cancellation of electric forces. This is how gravity, despite
being a much weaker force, can be a dominating and more pervasive
force in nature.
3.
The constant of proportionality k in Coulomb’s law is a matter of
choice if the unit of charge is to be defined using Coulomb’s law. In SI
units, however, what is defined is the unit of current (A) via its magnetic
effect (Ampere’s law) and the unit of charge (coulomb) is simply defined
by (1C = 1 A s). In this case, the value of k is no longer arbitrary; it is
approximately 9 × 109 N m2 C–2.
4.
The rather large value of k, i.e., the large size of the unit of charge
(1C) from the point of view of electric effects arises because (as
mentioned in point 3 already) the unit of charge is defined in terms of
magnetic forces (forces on  current–carrying wires) which are generally
much weaker than the electric forces. Thus while 1 ampere is a unit
of reasonable size for magnetic effects, 1 C = 1 A s, is too big a unit for
electric effects.
5.
The additive property of charge is not an ‘obvious’ property. It is related
to the fact that electric charge has no direction associated with it;
charge is a scalar.
6.
Charge is not only a scalar (or invariant) under rotation; it is also
invariant for frames of reference in relative motion. This is not always
true for every scalar. For example, kinetic energy is a scalar under
rotation, but is not invariant for frames of reference in relative
motion.
7.
Conservation of total charge of an isolated system is a property
independent of the scalar nature of charge noted in point 6.
Conservation refers to invariance in time in a given frame of reference.
A quantity may be scalar but not conserved (like kinetic energy in an
inelastic collision). On the other hand, one can have conserved vector
quantity (e.g., angular momentum of an isolated system).
8.
Quantisation of electric charge is a basic (unexplained) law of nature;
interestingly, there is no analogous law on quantisation of mass.
9.
Superposition principle should not be regarded as ‘obvious’, or
equated with the law of addition of vectors. It says two things:
force on one charge due to another charge is unaffected by the
presence of other charges, and there are no additional three-body,
four-body, etc., forces which arise only when there are more than
two charges.
10. The electric field due to a discrete charge configuration is not defined
at the locations of the discrete charges. For continuous volume
charge distribution, it is defined at any point in the distribution.
For a surface charge distribution, electric field is discontinuous
across the surface.
11. The electric field due to a charge configuration with total charge zero
is not zero; but for distances large compared to the size of
the configuration, its field falls off faster than 1/r 2, typical of field
due to a single charge. An electric dipole is the simplest example of
this fact.
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 42 :
 42
Physics
EXERCISES
1.1
What is the force between  two small charged spheres having
charges of 2 × 10–7C and 3 × 10–7C placed 30 cm apart in air?
1.2
The electrostatic force on a small sphere of charge 0.4 mC due to
another small sphere of charge –0.8 mC in air is 0.2 N. (a) What is
the distance between the two spheres? (b) What is the force on the
second sphere due to the first?
1.3
Check that the ratio ke2/G memp is dimensionless. Look up a Table
of Physical Constants and determine the value of this ratio. What
does the ratio signify?
1.4
(a) Explain the meaning of the statement ‘electric charge of a body
is quantised’.
(b) Why can one ignore quantisation of electric charge when dealing
with macroscopic i.e., large scale charges?
1.5
When a glass rod is rubbed with a silk cloth, charges appear on
both. A similar phenomenon is observed with many other pairs of
bodies. Explain how this observation is consistent with the law of
conservation of charge.
1.6
Four point charges qA = 2 mC, qB = –5 mC, qC = 2 mC, and qD = –5 mC are
located at the corners of a square ABCD of side 10 cm. What is the
force on a charge of 1 mC placed at the centre of the square?
1.7
(a) An electrostatic field line is a continuous curve. That is, a field
line cannot have sudden breaks. Why not?
(b) Explain why two field lines never cross each other at any point?
1.8
Two point charges qA = 3 mC and qB = –3 mC are located 20 cm apart
in vacuum.
(a) What is the electric field at the midpoint O of the line AB joining
the two charges?
(b) If a negative test charge of magnitude 1.5 × 10–9 C is placed at
this point, what is the force experienced by the test charge?
1.9
A system has two charges qA = 2.5 × 10–7 C and qB  =  –2.5 × 10–7 C
located at points A: (0, 0, –15 cm) and B: (0,0, +15 cm), respectively.
What are the total charge and electric dipole moment of the system?
1.10
An electric dipole with dipole moment 4 × 10–9 C m is aligned at 30°
with the direction of a uniform electric field of magnitude 5 × 104 NC–1.
Calculate the magnitude of the torque acting on the dipole.
1.11
A polythene piece rubbed with wool is found to have a negative
charge of 3 × 10–7 C.
(a) Estimate the number of electrons transferred (from which to
which?)
(b) Is there a transfer of mass from wool to polythene?
1.12
(a) Two insulated charged copper spheres A and B have their centres
separated by a distance of 50 cm. What is the mutual force of
electrostatic repulsion if the charge on each is 6.5 × 10–7 C? The
radii of A and B are negligible compared to the distance of
separation.
(b) What is the force of repulsion if each sphere is charged double
the above amount, and the distance between them is halved?
1.13
Figure 1.30 shows tracks of three charged particles in a uniform
electrostatic field. Give the signs of the three charges. Which particle
has the highest charge to mass ratio?
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 43 :
 Electric Charges
and Fields
43
FIGURE 1.30
1.14
Consider a uniform electric field E = 3 × 103 î N/C. (a)  What is  the
flux of this field through a square of 10 cm on a side whose plane is
parallel to the yz plane? (b) What is the  flux through the same
square if the normal  to its plane makes a 60° angle with the x-axis?
1.15
What is the net flux of the uniform electric field of Exercise 1.14
through a cube of side 20 cm oriented so that its faces are parallel
to the coordinate planes?
1.16
Careful measurement of the electric field at the surface of a black
box indicates that the net outward flux through the surface of the
box is 8.0 × 103 Nm2/C. (a) What is the net charge inside the box?
(b) If the net outward flux through the surface of the box were zero,
could you conclude that there were no charges inside the box? Why
or Why not?
1.17
A point charge +10 mC is a distance 5 cm directly above the centre
of a square of side 10 cm, as shown in Fig. 1.31. What is the
magnitude of the electric flux through the square? (Hint: Think of
the square as one face of a cube with edge 10 cm.)
FIGURE 1.31
1.18
A point charge of 2.0 mC is at the centre of a  cubic Gaussian
surface 9.0 cm on edge. What is the net electric flux through the
surface?
1.19
A point charge causes an electric flux of –1.0 × 103 Nm2/C to pass
through a spherical Gaussian surface of 10.0 cm radius centred on
the charge. (a)  If the radius of the Gaussian surface were doubled,
how much flux would  pass through the surface? (b) What is the
value of the point charge?
1.20
A conducting sphere of radius 10 cm has an unknown charge. If
the electric field 20 cm from the centre of the sphere is 1.5 × 103 N/C
and points radially inward, what is the net charge on the sphere?
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 44 :
 44
Physics
1.21
A uniformly charged conducting sphere of 2.4 m diameter has a
surface charge density of 80.0 mC/m2. (a) Find the charge on the
sphere. (b) What is the total electric flux leaving the surface of the
sphere?
1.22
An infinite line charge produces a field of 9 × 104 N/C at a distance
of 2 cm. Calculate the linear charge density.
1.23
Two large, thin metal plates are parallel and close to each other. On
their inner faces, the plates have surface charge densities of opposite
signs and of magnitude 17.0 × 10–22 C/m2. What is E: (a) in the outer
region of the first plate, (b) in the outer region of the second plate,
and (c) between the plates?
2024-25
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 1 :
 2.1  I
2.1  I
2.1  I
2.1  I
2.1  INTRODUCTION
NTRODUCTION
NTRODUCTION
NTRODUCTION
NTRODUCTION
In Chapters 5 and 7 (Class XI), the notion of potential energy was
introduced. When an external force does work in taking a body from a
point to another against a force like spring force or gravitational force,
that work gets stored as potential energy of the body. When the external
force is removed, the body moves, gaining kinetic energy and losing
an equal amount of potential energy. The sum of kinetic and
potential energies is thus conserved. Forces of this kind are called
conservative forces. Spring force and gravitational force are examples of
conservative forces.
Coulomb force between two (stationary) charges is also a conservative
force. This is not surprising, since both have inverse-square dependence
on distance and differ mainly in the proportionality constants – the
masses in the gravitational law are replaced by charges in Coulomb’s
law. Thus, like the potential energy of a mass in a gravitational
field, we can define electrostatic potential energy of a charge in an
electrostatic field.
Consider an electrostatic field E
 E
 E
 E
 E due to some charge configuration.
First, for simplicity, consider the field EEEEE due to a charge Q placed at the
origin. Now, imagine that we bring a test charge q from a point R to a
point P against the repulsive force on it due to the charge Q. With reference
Chapter Two
ELECTROSTATIC
POTENTIAL AND
CAPACITANCE
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 2 :
 Physics
46
to Fig. 2.1, this will happen if Q and q are both positive
or both negative. For definiteness, let us take Q, q > 0.
Two remarks may be made here. First, we assume
that the test charge q is so small that it does not disturb
the original configuration, namely the charge Q at the
origin (or else, we keep Q fixed at the origin by some
unspecified force). Second, in bringing the charge q from
R to P, we apply an external force Fext just enough to
counter the repulsive electric force FE (i.e, Fext= –FE).
This means there is no net force on or acceleration of
the charge q when it is brought from R to P, i.e., it is
brought with infinitesimally slow constant speed. In
this situation, work done by the external force is the negative of the work
done by the electric force, and gets fully stored in the form of potential
energy of the charge q. If the external force is removed on reaching P, the
electric force will take the charge away from Q – the stored energy (potential
energy) at P is used to provide kinetic energy to the charge q in such a
way that the sum of the kinetic and potential energies is conserved.
Thus, work done by external forces in moving a charge q from R to P is
WRP =   
        =    –
 (2.1)
This work done is against electrostatic repulsive force and gets stored
as potential energy.
At every point in electric field, a particle with charge q possesses a
certain electrostatic potential energy, this work done increases its potential
energy by an amount equal to potential energy difference between points
R and P.
Thus, potential energy difference
P
R
RP
U
U
U
W
∆
=
−
=
(2.2)
(Note here that this displacement is in an opposite sense to the electric
force and hence work done by electric field is negative, i.e., –WRP .)
Therefore, we can define electric potential energy difference between
two points as the work required to be done by an external force in moving
(without accelerating) charge q from one point to another for electric field
of any arbitrary charge configuration.
Two important comments may be made at this stage:
(i)
The right side of Eq. (2.2) depends only on the initial and final positions
of the charge. It means that the work done by an electrostatic field in
moving a charge from one point to another depends only on the initial
and the final points and is independent of the path taken to go from
one point to the other. This is the fundamental characteristic of a
conservative force. The concept of the potential energy would not be
meaningful if the work depended on the path. The path-independence
of work done by an electrostatic field can be proved using the
Coulomb’s law. We omit this proof here.
FIGURE 2.1 A test charge q (> 0) is
moved from the point R to the
point P against the repulsive
force on it by the charge Q (> 0)
placed at the origin.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 3 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
47
(ii) Equation (2.2) defines potential energy difference in terms
of the physically meaningful quantity work. Clearly,
potential energy so defined is undetermined to within an
additive constant.What this means is that the actual value
of potential energy is not physically significant; it is only
the difference of potential energy that is significant. We can
always add an arbitrary constant a to potential energy at
every point, since this will not change the potential energy
difference:
(
)
(
)
P
R
P
R
U
U
U
U
α
α
+
−
+
=
−
Put it differently, there is a freedom in choosing the point
where potential energy is zero. A convenient choice is to have
electrostatic potential energy zero at infinity. With this choice,
if we take the point R at infinity, we get from Eq. (2.2)
P
P
P
W
U
U
U
∞
∞
=
−
=
(2.3)
Since the point P is arbitrary, Eq. (2.3) provides us with a
definition of potential energy of a charge q at any point.
Potential energy of charge q at a point (in the presence of field
due to any charge configuration) is the work done by the
external force (equal and opposite to the electric force) in
bringing the charge q from infinity to that point.
2.2  ELECTROSTATIC POTENTIAL
Consider any general static charge configuration. We define
potential energy of a test charge q in terms of the work done
on the charge q. This work is obviously proportional to q, since
the force at any point is qE, where E is the electric field at that
point due to the given charge configuration. It is, therefore,
convenient to divide the work by the amount of charge q, so
that the resulting quantity is independent of q. In other words,
work done per unit test charge is characteristic of the electric
field associated with the charge configuration. This leads to
the idea of electrostatic potential V due to a given charge
configuration. From Eq. (2.1), we get:
Work done by external force in bringing a unit positive
charge from point R to P
= VP – VR  =
−




U
U
q
P
R
(2.4)
where VP and VR  are the electrostatic potentials at P and R, respectively.
Note, as before, that it is not the actual value of potential but the potential
difference that is physically significant. If, as before, we choose the
potential to be zero at infinity, Eq. (2.4) implies:
Work done by an external force in bringing a unit positive charge
from infinity to a point = electrostatic potential (V ) at that point.
COUNT ALESSANDRO VOLTA (1745 –1827)
Count Alessandro Volta
(1745 – 1827) Italian
physicist, professor at
Pavia. Volta established
that the animal electri-
city observed by Luigi
Galvani, 1737–1798, in
experiments with frog
muscle tissue placed in
contact with dissimilar
metals, was not due to
any exceptional property
of animal tissues but
was 
also 
generated
whenever any wet body
was sandwiched between
dissimilar metals. This
led him to develop the
first voltaic pile, or
battery, consisting of a
large stack of moist disks
of cardboard (electro-
lyte) 
sandwiched
between disks of metal
(electrodes).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 4 :
 Physics
48
In other words, the electrostatic potential (V )
at any point in a region with electrostatic field is
the work done in bringing a unit positive
charge (without acceleration) from infinity to
that point.
The qualifying remarks made earlier regarding
potential energy also apply to the definition of
potential. To obtain the work done per unit test
charge, we should take an infinitesimal test charge
dq, obtain the work done dW in bringing it from
infinity to the point and determine the ratio
dW/dq. Also, the external force at every point of the
path is to be equal and opposite to the electrostatic
force on the test charge at that point.
2.3  POTENTIAL DUE TO A POINT CHARGE
Consider a point charge Q at the origin (Fig. 2.3). For definiteness, take Q
to be positive. We wish to determine the potential at any point P with
position vector r from the origin. For that we must
calculate the work done in bringing a unit positive
test charge from infinity to the point P. For Q > 0,
the work done against the repulsive force on the
test charge is positive. Since work done is
independent of the path, we choose a convenient
path – along the radial direction from infinity to
the point P.
At some intermediate point P¢ on the path, the
electrostatic force on a unit positive charge is
2
0
1 ˆ
4
'
Q
r
ε
×
′
π
r
(2.5)
where ˆ′r is the unit vector along OP¢. Work done
against this force from  r¢ to r¢ + Dr¢ is
2
0
4
'
Q
W
r
r
ε
∆
= −
∆′
π
(2.6)
The negative sign appears because for Dr¢ < 0, DW is positive. Total
work done (W) by the external force is obtained by integrating Eq. (2.6)
from r¢ = ¥ to r¢ = r,
W
Q
r
dr
Q
r
Q
r
r
r
= −
′
′ =
′
=
∞
∞
∫4
4
4
0
2
0
0
π
π
π
ε
ε
ε
(2.7)
This, by definition is the potential at P due to the charge Q
0
( )
4
Q
V r
r
ε
=
π
(2.8)
FIGURE 2.2 Work done on a test charge q
by the electrostatic field due to any given
charge configuration is independent
of the path, and depends only on
its initial and final positions.
FIGURE 2.3 Work done in bringing a unit
positive test charge from infinity to the
point P, against the repulsive force of
charge Q (Q > 0), is the potential at P due to
the charge Q.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 5 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
49
 EXAMPLE 2.1
Equation (2.8) is true for any
sign of the charge Q, though we
considered Q > 0 in its derivation.
For Q < 0, V < 0, i.e., work done (by
the external force) per unit positive
test charge in bringing it from
infinity to the point is negative. This
is equivalent to saying that work
done by the electrostatic force in
bringing the unit positive charge
form infinity to the point P is
positive. [This is as it should be,
since for Q < 0, the force on a unit
positive test charge is attractive, so
that the electrostatic force and the
displacement (from infinity to P) are
in the same direction.] Finally, we
note that Eq. (2.8) is consistent with
the choice that potential at infinity
be zero.
Figure (2.4) shows how the electrostatic potential ( 1/r) and the
electrostatic field (1/r 2 ) varies with r.
Example 2.1
(a) Calculate the potential at a point P due to a charge of 4 × 10–7C
located 9 cm away.
(b) Hence obtain the work done in bringing a charge of 2 × 10–9 C
from infinity to the point P. Does the answer depend on the path
along which the charge is brought?
Solution
(a)  
          = 4 × 104 V
(b) W = qV = 2 × 10–9C × 4 × 104V
     = 8 × 10–5 J
No, work done will be path independent. Any arbitrary infinitesimal
path can be resolved into two perpendicular displacements: One along
r and another perpendicular to r. The work done corresponding to
the later will be zero.
2.4  POTENTIAL DUE TO AN ELECTRIC DIPOLE
As we learnt in the last chapter, an electric dipole consists of two charges
q and  –q separated by a (small) distance 2a. Its total charge is zero. It is
characterised by a dipole moment vector p whose magnitude is q × 2a
and which points in the direction from –q to q (Fig. 2.5). We also saw that
the electric field of a dipole at a point with position vector r depends not
just on the magnitude r, but also on the angle between r and p. Further,
FIGURE 2.4 Variation of potential V with r [in units of
(Q/4pe0) m-1] (blue curve) and field with r [in units
of (Q/4pe0) m-2] (black curve) for a point charge Q.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 6 :
 Physics
50
the field falls off, at large distance, not as
1/r 2 (typical of field due to a single charge)
but as 1/r3. We, now, determine the electric
potential due to a dipole and contrast it
with the potential due to a single charge.
As before, we take the origin at the
centre of the dipole. Now we know that the
electric field obeys the superposition
principle. Since potential is related to the
work done by the field, electrostatic
potential also follows the superposition
principle. Thus, the potential due to the
dipole is the sum of potentials due to the
charges q and –q
V
q
r
q
r
=
−




1
4
0
1
2
πε
(2.9)
where r1 and r2 are the distances of the
point P from q and –q, respectively.
Now, by geometry,
2
2
2
1
2
r
r
a
ar
=
+
−
cosq
2
2
2
2
2
r
r
a
ar
=
+
+
 cosq
(2.10)
We take r much greater than a (
a
r 
) and retain terms only upto
the first order in a/r
  r
r
a
r
a
r
1
2
2
2
2
1
2
=
−
+




cosθ
  ≅
−




r
a
r
2
1
2
cosθ
(2.11)
 Similarly,
  r
r
a
r
2
2
2
1
2
≅
+




cosθ
(2.12)
Using the Binomial theorem and retaining terms upto the first order
in a/r ; we obtain,
1
1 1
2
1 1
1
1 2
r
r
a
r
r
a
r
≅
−




≅
+




−
cos
cos
/
θ
θ
[2.13(a)]
1
1 1
2
1 1
2
1 2
r
r
a
r
r
a
r
≅
+




≅
−




−
cos
cos
/
θ
θ
[2.13(b)]
 Using Eqs. (2.9) and (2.13) and p = 2qa, we get
V
q
a
r
p
r
=
=
4
4
0
2
0
2
π
π
ε
θ
θ
ε
2 cos
cos
(2.14)
Now, p cos q = p.rˆ
FIGURE 2.5 Quantities involved in the calculation
of potential due to a dipole.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 7 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
51
where ˆr  is the unit vector along the position vector OP.
The electric potential of a dipole is then given by
V
r
=
1
4
0
2
πε
p.rˆ
;       (r >> a)
 (2.15)
Equation (2.15) is, as indicated, approximately true only for distances
large compared to the size of the dipole, so that higher order terms in
a/r are negligible. For a point dipole p at the origin, Eq. (2.15) is, however,
exact.
From Eq. (2.15), potential on the dipole axis (q = 0, p ) is given by
2
0
1
4
p
V
r
ε
= ±
π
(2.16)
(Positive sign for q = 0, negative sign for q = p.) The potential in the
equatorial plane (q = p/2) is zero.
The important contrasting features of electric potential of a dipole
from that due to a single charge are clear from Eqs. (2.8) and (2.15):
(i)
The potential due to a dipole depends not just on r but also on the
angle between the position vector  r and the dipole moment vector p.
(It is, however, axially symmetric about p. That is, if you rotate the
position vector r  about  p, keeping q fixed, the points corresponding
to P on the cone so generated will have the same potential as at P.)
(ii) The electric dipole potential falls off, at large distance, as 1/r 2, not as
1/r, characteristic of the potential due to a single charge. (You can
refer to the Fig. 2.5 for graphs of 1/r 2 versus r and 1/r versus r,
drawn there in another context.)
2.5  POTENTIAL DUE TO A SYSTEM OF CHARGES
Consider a system of charges q1, q2,…, qn with position vectors r1, r2,…,
rn relative to some origin (Fig. 2.6). The potential V1 at P due to the charge
q1 is
1
1
0
1P
1
4
q
V
r
ε
=
π
where r1P is the distance between q1 and P.
Similarly, the potential V2 at P due to q2 and
V3 due to q3 are given by
2
2
0
2P
1
4
q
V
r
ε
=
π
, 
3
3
0
3P
1
4
q
V
r
ε
=
π
where r2P and r3P are the distances of P from
charges q2 and q3, respectively; and so on for the
potential due to other charges. By the
superposition principle, the potential V at P due
to the total charge configuration is the algebraic
sum of the potentials due to the individual
charges
V = V1 + V2 + ... + Vn
(2.17)
FIGURE 2.6 Potential at a point due to a
system of charges is the sum of potentials
due to individual charges.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 8 :
 Physics
52
 EXAMPLE 2.2
=
+
+
+




1
4
0
1
1
2
2
πε
q
r
q
r
q
r
n
n
P
P
P
......
(2.18)
If we have a continuous charge distribution characterised by a charge
density r (r), we divide it, as before, into small volume elements each of
size Dv and carrying a charge rDv. We then determine the potential due
to each volume element and sum (strictly speaking , integrate) over all
such contributions, and thus determine the potential due to the entire
distribution.
We have seen in Chapter 1 that for a uniformly charged spherical shell,
the electric field outside the shell is as if the entire charge is concentrated
at the centre. Thus, the potential outside the shell is given by
0
1
4
q
V
r
ε
=
π
   (
)
r
R
≥
[2.19(a)]
where q is the total charge on the shell and R its radius. The electric field
inside the shell is zero. This implies (Section 2.6) that potential is constant
inside the shell (as no work is done in moving a charge inside the shell),
and, therefore, equals its value at the surface, which is
0
1
4
q
V
R
ε
=
π
[2.19(b)]
Example 2.2 Two charges 3 × 10–8 C and –2 × 10–8 C are located
15 cm apart. At what point on the line joining the two charges is the
electric potential zero? Take the potential at infinity to be zero.
Solution Let us take the origin O at the location of the positive charge.
The line joining the two charges is taken to be the x-axis;  the negative
charge is taken to be on the right side of the origin (Fig. 2.7).
FIGURE 2.7
Let P be the required point on the x-axis where the potential is zero.
If x is the x-coordinate of P, obviously x must be positive. (There is no
possibility of potentials due to the two charges adding up to zero for
x < 0.) If x lies between O and A, we have
1
4
3 10
10
2 10
15
10
0
0
8
2
8
2
πε
×
×
−
×
−
×
=




–
–
–
–
(
)
x
x
where x is in cm. That is,
3
2
0
15
x
x
−
=
−
which gives x  =  9 cm.
If x lies on the extended line OA, the required condition is
3
2
0
15
x
x
−
=
−
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 9 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
53
 EXAMPLE 2.2
which gives
x  = 45 cm
Thus, electric potential is zero at 9 cm and 45 cm away from the
positive charge on the side of the negative charge. Note that the
formula for potential used in the calculation required choosing
potential to be zero at infinity.
Example 2.3  Figures 2.8 (a) and (b) show the field lines of a positive
and negative point charge respectively.
FIGURE 2.8
(a) Give the signs of the potential difference VP – VQ; VB – VA.
(b) Give the sign of the potential energy difference of a small negative
charge between the points Q and P; A and B.
(c) Give the sign of the work done by the field in moving a small
positive charge from Q to P.
(d) Give the sign of the work done by the external agency in moving
a small negative charge from B to A.
(e) Does the kinetic energy of a small negative charge increase or
decrease in going from B to A?
Solution
(a) As 
1
V
r
∝
, VP > VQ. Thus, (VP – VQ) is positive. Also VB is less negative
than VA .  Thus, VB > VA or (VB – VA) is positive.
(b) A small negative charge will be attracted towards positive charge.
The negative charge moves from higher potential energy to lower
potential energy. Therefore the sign of potential energy difference
of a small negative charge between Q and P is positive.
Similarly, (P.E.)A > (P.E.)B
 and hence sign of potential energy
differences is positive.
(c) In moving a small positive charge from Q to P, work has to be
done by an external agency against the electric field. Therefore,
work done by the field is negative.
(d) In moving a small negative charge from B to A work has to be
done by the external agency. It is positive.
(e) Due to force of repulsion on the negative charge, velocity decreases
and hence the kinetic energy decreases in going from B to A.
 EXAMPLE 2.3
Electric potential, equipotential surfaces:
http://video.mit.edu/watch/4-electrostatic-potential-elctric-energy-ev-conservative-field-
equipotential-sufaces-12584/
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 10 :
 Physics
54
FIGURE 2.10 Equipotential surfaces for a uniform electric field.
2.6  EQUIPOTENTIAL SURFACES
An equipotential surface is a surface with a constant value of potential
at all points on the surface. For a single charge q, the potential is given
by Eq. (2.8):
1
4
o
q
V
r
ε
=
π
This shows that V is a constant if r is constant. Thus, equipotential
surfaces of a single point charge are concentric spherical surfaces centred
at the charge.
Now the electric field lines for a single charge q are radial lines starting
from or ending at the charge, depending on whether q is positive or negative.
Clearly, the electric field at every point is normal to the equipotential surface
passing through that point. This is true in general: for any charge
configuration, equipotential surface through a point is normal to the
electric field at that point. The proof of this statement is simple.
If the field were not normal to the equipotential surface, it would
have non-zero component along the surface. To move a unit test charge
against the direction of the component of the field, work would have to
be done. But this is in contradiction to the definition of an equipotential
surface: there is no potential difference between any two points on the
surface and no work is required to move a test charge on the surface.
The electric field must, therefore, be normal to the equipotential surface
at every point. Equipotential surfaces offer an alternative visual picture
in addition to the picture of electric field lines around a charge
configuration.
FIGURE 2.9 For a
single charge q
(a) equipotential
surfaces are
spherical surfaces
centred at the
charge, and
(b) electric field
lines are radial,
starting from the
charge if q > 0.
For a uniform electric field E, say, along the x-axis, the equipotential
surfaces are planes normal to the x-axis, i.e., planes parallel to the y-z
plane (Fig. 2.10). Equipotential surfaces for (a) a dipole and (b) two
identical positive charges  are shown in Fig. 2.11.
FIGURE 2.11 Some equipotential surfaces for (a) a dipole,
(b) two identical positive charges.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 11 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
55
2.6.1  Relation between field and potential
Consider two closely spaced equipotential surfaces A and B (Fig. 2.12)
with potential values V and V + d V, where d V is the change in V in the
direction of the electric field E. Let P be a point on the
surface B. d l is the perpendicular distance of the
surface A from P. Imagine that a unit positive charge
is moved along this perpendicular from the surface B
to surface A against the electric field. The work done
in this process is |E|d l.
This work equals the potential difference
VA–VB.
Thus,
|E|d l = V – (V + dV)= – dV
i.e., |E|= −δ
δ
V
l
(2.20)
Since dV is negative, dV = – |dV|. we can rewrite
Eq (2.20) as
E = −
= +
δ
δ
δ
δ
V
l
V
l
(2.21)
We thus arrive at two important conclusions concerning the relation
between electric field and potential:
(i)
Electric field is in the direction in which the potential decreases
steepest.
(ii) Its magnitude is given by the change in the magnitude of potential
per unit displacement normal to the equipotential surface at the point.
2.7  POTENTIAL ENERGY OF A SYSTEM OF CHARGES
Consider first the simple case of two charges q1and q2 with position vector
r1 and r2 relative to some origin. Let us calculate the work done
(externally) in building up this configuration. This means that we consider
the charges q1 and q2 initially at infinity and determine the work done by
an external agency to bring the charges to the given locations. Suppose,
first the charge q1 is brought from infinity to the point r1. There is no
external field against which work needs to be done, so work done in
bringing q1 from infinity to r1 is zero. This charge produces a potential in
space given by
V
q
r
1
0
1
1
1
4
=
πε
P
where r1P is the distance of a point P in space from the location of q1.
From the definition of potential, work done in bringing charge q2 from
infinity to the point r2 is q2 times the potential at r2 due to q1:
work done on q2 = 
1
4
0
1
2
12
πε
q q
r
FIGURE 2.12 From the
potential to the field.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 12 :
 Physics
56
where r12 is the distance between points 1 and 2.
Since electrostatic force is conservative, this work gets
stored in the form of potential energy of the system. Thus,
the potential energy of a system of two charges q1 and q2 is
U
q q
r
=
1
4
0
1
2
12
πε
(2.22)
Obviously, if q2 was brought first to its present location and
q1 brought later, the potential energy U would be the same.
More generally, the potential energy expression,
Eq. (2.22), is unaltered whatever way the charges are brought to the specified
locations, because of path-independence of work for electrostatic force.
Equation (2.22) is true for any sign of  q1and q2. If q1q2 > 0, potential
energy is positive. This is as expected, since for like charges (q1q2 > 0),
electrostatic force is repulsive and a positive amount of work is needed to
be done against this force to bring the charges from infinity to a finite
distance apart. For unlike charges (q1 q2 < 0), the electrostatic force is
attractive. In that case, a positive amount of work is needed against this
force to take the charges from the given location to infinity. In other words,
a negative amount of work is needed for the reverse path (from infinity to
the present locations), so the potential energy is negative.
Equation (2.22) is easily generalised for a system of any number of
point charges. Let us calculate the potential energy of a system of three
charges q1, q2 and q3 located at r1, r2, r3, respectively. To bring q1 first
from infinity to r1, no work is required. Next we bring q2 from infinity to
r2. As before, work done in this step is
1
2
2
1
2
0
12
1
(
)
4
q q
q V
r
ε
=
π
r
(2.23)
The charges q1 and q2 produce a potential, which at any point P is
given by
V
q
r
q
r
1 2
0
1
1
2
2
1
4
,
=
+




πε
P
P
(2.24)
Work done next in bringing q3 from infinity to the point r3 is  q3 times
V1, 2 at r3
q V
q q
r
q q
r
3
1 2
3
0
1
3
13
2
3
23
1
4
, (
)
r
=
+




πε
(2.25)
The total work done in assembling the charges
at the given locations is obtained by adding the work
done in different steps [Eq. (2.23) and Eq. (2.25)],
U
q q
r
q q
r
q q
r
=
+
+




1
4
0
1
2
12
1
3
13
2
3
23
πε
(2.26)
Again, because of the conservative nature of the
electrostatic force (or equivalently, the path
independence of work done), the final expression for
U, Eq. (2.26), is independent of the manner in which
the configuration is assembled. The potential energy
FIGURE 2.13 Potential energy of a
system of charges q1 and q2 is
directly proportional to the product
of charges and inversely to the
distance between them.
FIGURE 2.14 Potential energy of a
system of three charges is given by
Eq. (2.26), with the notation given
in the figure.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 13 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
57
 EXAMPLE 2.4
is characteristic of the present state of configuration, and not the way
the state is achieved.
Example 2.4 Four charges are arranged at the corners of a square
ABCD of side d, as shown in Fig. 2.15.(a) Find the work required to
put together this arrangement. (b) A charge q0 is brought to the centre
E of the square, the four charges being held fixed at its corners. How
much extra work is needed to do this?
FIGURE 2.15
Solution
(a) Since the work done depends on the final arrangement of the
charges, and not on how they are put together, we calculate work
needed for one way of putting the charges at A, B, C and D. Suppose,
first the charge +q is brought to A, and then the charges –q, +q, and
–q are brought to B, C and D, respectively. The total work needed can
be calculated in steps:
(i)
Work needed to bring charge +q to A when no charge is present
elsewhere: this is zero.
(ii) Work needed to bring –q to B when +q is at A. This is given by
(charge at B) × (electrostatic potential at B due to charge +q at A)
= −
× 


= −
q
q
d
q
d
4
4
0
2
0
π
π
ε
ε
(iii) Work needed to bring charge +q to C when +q is at A and –q is at
B. This is given by (charge at C) × (potential at C due to charges
at A and B)
= +
+
+
−




q
q
d
q
d
4
2
4
0
0
π
π
ε
ε
      =
−
−




q
d
2
0
4
1
1
2
πε
(iv) Work needed to bring –q to D when +q at A,–q at B, and +q at C.
This is given by (charge at D) × (potential at D due to charges at A,
B and C)
      = −
+
+
−
+




q
q
d
q
d
q
d
4
4
2
4
0
0
0
π
π
π
ε
ε
ε
=
−
−




q
d
2
0
4
2
1
2
πε
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 14 :
 Physics
58
 EXAMPLE 2.4
Add the work done in steps (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv). The total work
required is
=
−
+
+
−



+
−










q
d
2
0
4
0
1
1
1
2
2
1
2
πε
( )
( )
 =
−
−
(
)
q
d
2
0
4
4
2
πε
The work done depends only on the arrangement of the charges, and
not how they are assembled. By definition, this is the total
electrostatic energy of the charges.
(Students may try calculating same work/energy by taking charges
in any other order they desire and convince themselves that the energy
will remain the same.)
(b) The extra work necessary to bring a charge q0 to the point E when
the four charges are at A, B, C and D is q0 × (electrostatic potential at
E due to the charges at A, B, C and D). The electrostatic potential at
E is clearly zero since potential due to A and C is cancelled by that
due to B and D. Hence, no work is required to bring any charge to
point E.
2.8  POTENTIAL ENERGY IN AN EXTERNAL FIELD
2.8.1  Potential energy of a single charge
In Section 2.7, the source of the electric field was specified – the charges
and their locations - and the potential energy of the system of those charges
was  determined. In this section, we ask a related but a distinct question.
What is the potential energy of a charge q in a given field? This question
was, in fact, the starting point that led us to the notion of the electrostatic
potential (Sections 2.1 and 2.2). But here we address this question again
to clarify in what way it is different from the discussion in Section 2.7.
The main difference is that we are now concerned with the potential
energy of a charge (or charges) in an external field. The external field E is
not produced by the given charge(s) whose potential energy we wish to
calculate. E is produced by sources external to the given charge(s).The
external sources may be known, but often they are unknown or
unspecified; what is specified is the electric field E or the electrostatic
potential V due to the external sources. We assume that the charge q
does not significantly affect the sources producing the external field. This
is true if q is very small, or the external sources are held fixed by other
unspecified forces. Even if q is finite, its influence on the external sources
may still be ignored in the situation when very strong sources far away
at infinity produce a finite field E in the region of interest. Note again that
we are interested in determining the potential energy of a given charge q
(and later, a system of charges) in the external field; we are not interested
in the potential energy of the sources producing the external electric field.
The external electric field E and the corresponding external potential
V may vary from point to point. By definition, V at a point P is the work
done in bringing a unit positive charge from infinity to the point P.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 15 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
59
 EXAMPLE 2.5
(We continue to take potential at infinity to be zero.) Thus, work done in
bringing a charge q from infinity to the point P in the external field is qV.
This work is stored in the form of potential energy of q. If the point P has
position vector r relative to some origin, we can write:
Potential energy of q at r in an external field
= qV(r)
(2.27)
where V(r) is the external potential at the point r.
Thus, if an electron with charge q = e = 1.6×10–19 C is accelerated by
a potential difference of DV = 1 volt, it would gain energy of qDV = 1.6 ×
10–19J. This unit of energy is defined as 1 electron volt or 1eV, i.e.,
1 eV=1.6 × 10–19J. The units based on eV are most commonly used in
atomic, nuclear and particle physics, (1 keV = 103eV = 1.6 × 10–16J, 1 MeV
= 106eV = 1.6 × 10–13J, 1 GeV = 109eV = 1.6 × 10–10J and 1 TeV = 1012eV
= 1.6 × 10–7J). [This has already been defined on Page 117, XI Physics
Part I, Table 6.1.]
2.8.2
Potential energy of a system of two charges in an
external field
Next, we ask: what is the potential energy of a system of two charges q1
and q2 located at r1and r2, respectively, in an external field? First, we
calculate the work done in bringing the charge q1 from infinity to r1.
Work done in this step is q1 V(r1), using Eq. (2.27). Next, we consider the
work done in bringing q2 to r2. In this step, work is done not only against
the external field E but also against the field due to q1.
Work done on q2 against the external field
= q2 V (r2)
Work done on q2 against the field due to q1
1
2
12
4
o
q q
r
ε
=
π
where  r12 is the distance between q1 and q2. We have made use of Eqs.
(2.27) and (2.22). By the superposition principle for fields, we add up
the work done on q2 against the two fields (E and that due to q1):
Work done in bringing q2 to r2
1
2
2
2
12
(
)
4
o
q q
q V
r
ε
=
+
π
r
(2.28)
Thus,
 Potential energy of the system
= the total work done in assembling the configuration
1
2
1
1
2
2
0 12
(
)
(
)
4
q q
q V
q V
r
ε
=
+
+
π
r
r
 (2.29)
Example 2.5
(a) Determine the electrostatic potential energy of a system consisting
of  two charges 7 mC and –2 mC (and with no external field) placed
at (–9 cm, 0, 0) and (9 cm, 0, 0) respectively.
(b) How much work is required to separate the two charges infinitely
away from each other?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 16 :
 Physics
60
 EXAMPLE 2.5
(c) Suppose that the same system of charges is now placed in an
external electric field E = A (1/r 2); A = 9 × 105 NC–1 m2. What would
the electrostatic energy of the configuration be?
Solution
(a)
12
9
1
2
0
1
7
( 2)
10
9
10
4
0.18
q q
U
r
ε
−
× −
×
=
=
×
×
π
= –0.7 J.
(b) W = U2 – U1  = 0 – U = 0 – (–0.7) = 0.7 J.
(c) The mutual interaction energy of the two charges remains
unchanged. In addition, there is the energy of interaction of the
two charges with the external electric field. We find,
( )
(
)
1
1
2
2
7 C
2 C
0.09m
0.09m
q V
q V
A
A
µ
−µ
+
=
+
r
r
and the net electrostatic energy is
( )
(
)
1
2
1
1
2
2
0 12
7 C
2 C
0.7 J
4
0.09 m
0.09 m
q q
q V
q V
A
A
r
ε
µ
−µ
+
+
=
+
−
π
r
r
         
70
20
0.7
49.3 J
=
−
−
=
2.8.3  Potential energy of a dipole in an external field
Consider a dipole with charges q1 = +q and q2 = –q placed in a uniform
electric field E, as shown in Fig. 2.16.
As seen in the last chapter, in a uniform electric field,
the dipole experiences no net force; but experiences a
torque t t t t t given by
t = 
t = 
t = 
t = 
t = p × E
(2.30)
which will tend to rotate it (unless p is parallel or
antiparallel to E). Suppose an external torque tttttext is
applied in such a manner that it just neutralises this
torque and rotates it in the plane of paper from angle q0
to angle q1 at an infinitesimal angular speed and without
angular acceleration. The amount of work done by the
external torque will be given by
(
)
cos
cos
pE
θ
θ
0
1
=
−
(2.31)
This work is stored as the potential energy of the system. We can
then associate potential energy U(q) with an inclination q  of the dipole.
Similar to other potential energies, there is a freedom in choosing the
angle where the potential energy U is taken to be zero. A natural choice
is to take q0 = p / 2. (An explanation for it is provided towards the end of
discussion.)  We can then write,
(2.32)
FIGURE 2.16 Potential energy of a
dipole in a uniform external field.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 17 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
61
 EXAMPLE 2.6
This expression can alternately be understood also from Eq. (2.29).
We apply Eq. (2.29) to the present system of two charges +q and –q. The
potential energy  expression then reads
( )
( )
(
)
2
1
2
[
]
4
2
q
U
q V
V
a
θ
ε0
=
−
−
′
π
×
r
r
(2.33)
Here, r1 and r2 denote the position vectors of +q and –q. Now, the
potential difference between positions r1 and r2 equals the work done
in bringing a unit positive charge against field from r2 to r1. The
displacement parallel to the force is 2a cosq. Thus, [V(r1)–V (r2)] =
–E × 2a cosq . We thus obtain,
( )
2
2
cos
4
2
4
2
θ
θ
ε
ε
0
0
= −
−
= −
−
′
π
×
π
×
p.E
q
q
U
pE
a
a
(2.34)
We note that U¢ (q) differs from U(q ) by a quantity which is just a constant
for a given dipole. Since a constant is insignificant for potential energy, we
can drop the second term in Eq. (2.34) and it then reduces to Eq. (2.32).
We can now understand why we took q0=p/2. In this case, the work
done against the external field E in bringing +q and – q are equal and
opposite and cancel out, i.e., q [V (r1)  – V (r2)]=0.
Example 2.6 A molecule of a substance has a permanent electric
dipole moment of magnitude 10–29 C m. A mole of this substance is
polarised (at low temperature) by applying a strong electrostatic field
of magnitude 106 V m–1. The direction of the field is suddenly changed
by an angle of 60º. Estimate the heat released by the substance in
aligning its dipoles along the new direction of the field. For simplicity,
assume 100% polarisation of the sample.
Solution   Here, dipole moment of each molecules = 10–29 C m
As 1 mole of the substance contains 6 × 1023 molecules,
total dipole moment of all the molecules, p = 6 × 1023 × 10–29 C m
    = 6 × 10–6
 C m
Initial potential energy, Ui = –pE cos q = –6×10–6×106 cos 0° = –6 J
Final potential energy (when q = 60°), Uf = –6 × 10–6 × 106 cos 60° = –3 J
Change in potential energy = –3 J – (–6J) = 3 J
So, there is loss in potential energy. This must be the energy released
by the substance in the form of heat in aligning its dipoles.
2.9  ELECTROSTATICS OF CONDUCTORS
Conductors and insulators were described briefly in Chapter 1.
Conductors contain mobile charge carriers. In metallic conductors, these
charge carriers are electrons. In a metal, the outer (valence) electrons
part away from their atoms and are free to move. These electrons are free
within the metal but not free  to leave the metal. The free electrons form a
kind of ‘gas’; they collide with each other and with the ions, and move
randomly in different directions. In an external electric field, they drift
against the direction of the field. The positive ions made up of the nuclei
and the bound electrons remain held in their fixed positions. In electrolytic
conductors, the charge carriers are both positive and negative ions; but
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 18 :
 Physics
62
the situation in this case is more involved – the movement of the charge
carriers is affected both by the external electric field as also by the
so-called chemical forces (see Chapter 3). We shall restrict our discussion
to metallic solid conductors. Let us note important results regarding
electrostatics of conductors.
1. Inside a conductor, electrostatic field is zero
Consider a conductor, neutral or charged. There may also be an external
electrostatic field. In the static situation, when there is no current inside
or on the surface of the conductor, the electric field is zero everywhere
inside the conductor. This fact can be taken as the defining property of a
conductor. A conductor has free electrons. As long as electric field is not
zero, the free charge carriers would experience force and drift. In the
static situation, the free charges have so distributed themselves that the
electric field is zero everywhere inside. Electrostatic field is zero inside a
conductor.
2. At the surface of a charged conductor, electrostatic field
must be normal to the surface at every point
If E were not normal to the surface, it would have some non-zero
component along the surface. Free charges on the surface of the conductor
would then experience force and move. In the static situation, therefore,
E should have no tangential component. Thus electrostatic field at the
surface of a charged conductor must be normal to the surface at every
point. (For a conductor without any surface charge density, field is zero
even at the surface.) See result 5.
3. The interior of a conductor can have no excess charge in
the static situation
A neutral conductor has equal amounts of positive and negative charges
in every small volume or surface element. When the conductor is charged,
the excess charge can reside only on the surface in the static situation.
This follows from the Gauss’s law. Consider any arbitrary volume element
v inside a conductor. On the closed surface S bounding the volume
element v, electrostatic field is zero. Thus the total electric flux through S
is zero. Hence, by Gauss’s law, there is no net charge enclosed by S. But
the surface S can be made as small as you like, i.e., the volume v can be
made vanishingly small. This means there is no net charge at any point
inside the conductor, and any excess charge must reside at the surface.
4. Electrostatic potential is constant throughout the volume
of the conductor and has the same value (as inside) on
its surface
This follows from results 1 and 2 above. Since E = 0 inside the conductor
and has no tangential component on the surface, no work is done in
moving a small test charge within the conductor and on its surface. That
is, there is no potential difference between any two points inside or on
the surface of the conductor. Hence, the result. If the conductor is charged,
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 19 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
63
electric field normal to the surface exists; this means potential will be
different for the surface and a point just outside the surface.
In a system of conductors of arbitrary size, shape and
charge configuration, each conductor is characterised by a constant
value of potential, but this constant may differ from one conductor to
the other.
5. Electric field at the surface of a charged conductor
0
ˆ
σ
ε
=
E
n
(2.35)
where s is the surface charge density and ˆn  is a unit vector normal
to the surface in the outward direction.
To derive the result, choose a pill box (a short cylinder) as the Gaussian
surface about any point P on the surface, as shown in Fig. 2.17. The pill
box is partly inside and partly outside the surface of the conductor. It
has a small area of cross section d S and negligible height.
Just inside the surface, the electrostatic field is zero; just outside, the
field is normal to the surface with magnitude E. Thus,
the contribution to the total flux through the pill box
comes only from the outside (circular) cross-section
of the pill box. This equals  ± EdS (positive for s > 0,
negative for s < 0), since over the small area dS, E
may be considered constant and E and dS are parallel
or antiparallel. The charge enclosed by the pill box
is  sdS.
By Gauss’s law
EdS = 
0
S
σ δ
ε
E = 
0
σ
ε
(2.36)
Including the fact that electric field is normal to the
surface, we get the vector relation, Eq. (2.35), which
is true for both signs of s. For s > 0, electric field is
normal to the surface outward; for s < 0, electric field
is normal to the surface inward.
6. Electrostatic shielding
Consider a conductor with a cavity, with no charges inside the cavity. A
remarkable result is that the electric field inside the cavity is zero, whatever
be the size and shape of the cavity and whatever be the charge on the
conductor and the external fields in which it might be placed. We have
proved a simple case of this result already: the electric field inside a charged
spherical shell is zero. The proof of the result for the shell makes use of
the spherical symmetry of the shell (see Chapter 1). But the vanishing of
electric field in the (charge-free) cavity of a conductor is, as mentioned
above, a very general result. A related result is that even if the conductor
FIGURE 2.17 The Gaussian surface
(a pill box) chosen to derive Eq. (2.35)
for electric field at the surface of a
charged conductor.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 20 :
 Physics
64
 EXAMPLE 2.7
FIGURE 2.18 The electric field inside a
cavity of any conductor is zero. All
charges reside only on the outer surface
of a conductor with cavity. (There are no
charges placed in the cavity.)
is charged or charges are induced on a neutral
conductor by an external field, all charges reside
only on the outer surface of a conductor with cavity.
The proofs of the results noted in Fig. 2.18 are
omitted here, but we note their important
implication. Whatever be the charge and field
configuration outside, any cavity in a conductor
remains shielded from outside electric influence: the
field inside the cavity is always zero. This is known
as electrostatic shielding. The effect can be made
use of in protecting sensitive instruments from
outside electrical influence. Figure 2.19 gives a
summary of the important electrostatic properties
of a conductor.
Example 2.7
(a) A comb run through one’s dry hair attracts small bits of paper.
Why?
What happens if the hair is wet or if it is a rainy day? (Remember,
a paper does not conduct electricity.)
(b) Ordinary rubber is an insulator. But special rubber tyres of
aircraft are made slightly conducting. Why is this necessary?
(c) Vehicles carrying inflammable materials usually have metallic
ropes touching the ground during motion. Why?
(d) A bird perches on a bare high power line, and nothing happens
to the bird. A man standing on the ground touches the same line
and gets a fatal shock. Why?
Solution
(a) This is because the comb gets charged by friction. The molecules
in the paper gets polarised by the charged comb, resulting  in a
net force of attraction. If the hair is wet, or if it is rainy day, friction
between hair and the comb reduces. The comb does not get
charged and thus it will not attract small bits of paper.
FIGURE 2.19 Some important electrostatic properties of a conductor.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 21 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
65
 EXAMPLE 2.7
(b) To enable them to conduct charge (produced by friction) to the
ground;  as too much of static electricity accumulated may result
in spark and result in fire.
(c) Reason similar to (b).
(d) Current passes only when there is difference in potential.
2.10  DIELECTRICS AND POLARISATION
Dielectrics are non-conducting substances. In contrast to conductors,
they have no (or negligible number of ) charge carriers. Recall from Section
2.9 what happens when a conductor is placed in an
external electric field. The free charge carriers move
and charge distribution in the conductor adjusts
itself in such a way that the electric field due to
induced charges opposes the external field within
the conductor. This happens until, in the static
situation, the two fields cancel each other and the
net electrostatic field in the conductor is zero. In a
dielectric, this free movement of charges is not
possible. It turns out that the external field induces
dipole moment by stretching or re-orienting
molecules of the dielectric. The collective effect of all
the molecular dipole moments is net charges on the
surface of the dielectric which produce a field that
opposes the external field. Unlike in a conductor,
however, the opposing field so induced does not
exactly cancel the external field. It only reduces it.
The extent of the effect depends on the
nature of the dielectric. To understand the
effect, we need to look at the charge
distribution of a dielectric at the
molecular level.
The molecules of a substance may be
polar or non-polar. In a non-polar
molecule, the centres of positive and
negative charges coincide. The molecule
then has no permanent (or intrinsic) dipole
moment. Examples of non-polar molecules
are oxygen (O2) and hydrogen (H2)
molecules which, because of their
symmetry, have no dipole moment. On the
other hand, a polar molecule is one in which
the centres of positive and negative charges
are separated (even when there is no
external field). Such molecules have a
permanent dipole moment. An ionic
molecule such as HCl or a molecule of water
(H2O) are examples of polar molecules.
FIGURE 2.20 Difference in behaviour
of a conductor and a dielectric
in an external electric field.
FIGURE 2.21 Some examples of polar
and non-polar molecules.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 22 :
 Physics
66
In an external electric field, the
positive and negative charges of a non-
polar molecule are displaced in opposite
directions. The displacement stops when
the external force on the constituent
charges of the molecule is balanced by
the restoring force (due to internal fields
in the molecule). The non-polar molecule
thus develops an induced dipole moment.
The dielectric is said to be polarised by
the external field. We consider only the
simple situation when the induced dipole
moment is in the direction of the field and
is proportional to the field strength.
(Substances for which this assumption
is true are called linear isotropic
dielectrics.) The induced dipole moments
of different molecules add up giving a net
dipole moment of the dielectric in the
presence of the external field.
A dielectric with polar molecules also
develops a net dipole moment in an
external field, but for a different reason.
In the absence of any external field, the
different permanent dipoles are oriented
randomly due to thermal agitation; so
the total dipole moment is zero. When
an external field is applied, the individual dipole moments tend  to align
with the field. When summed overall the molecules, there is then a net
dipole moment in the direction of the external field, i.e., the dielectric is
polarised. The extent of polarisation depends on the relative strength of
two mutually opposite factors: the dipole potential energy in the external
field tending to align the dipoles with the field and thermal energy tending
to disrupt the alignment. There may be, in addition, the  ‘induced dipole
moment’ effect as for non-polar molecules, but generally the alignment
effect is more important for polar molecules.
Thus in either case, whether polar or non-polar, a dielectric develops
a net dipole moment in the presence of an external field. The dipole
moment per unit volume is called polarisation and is denoted by P. For
linear isotropic dielectrics,
0
ε χ
=
P
E
e
(2.37)
where ce is a constant characteristic of the dielectric and is known as the
electric susceptibility of the dielectric medium.
It is possible to relate ce to the molecular properties of the substance,
but we shall not pursue that here.
The question is: how does the polarised dielectric modify the original
external field inside it? Let us consider, for simplicity, a rectangular
dielectric slab placed in a uniform external field E0 parallel to two of its
faces. The field causes a uniform polarisation P of the dielectric. Thus
FIGURE 2.22 A dielectric develops a net dipole
moment in an external electric field. (a) Non-polar
molecules, (b) Polar molecules.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 23 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
67
every volume element Dv of the slab has a dipole moment
P Dv in the direction of the field. The volume element Dv  is
macroscopically small but contains a very large number of
molecular dipoles. Anywhere inside the dielectric, the
volume element Dv has no net charge (though it has net
dipole moment). This is, because, the positive charge of one
dipole sits close to the negative charge of the adjacent dipole.
However, at the surfaces of the dielectric normal to the
electric field, there is evidently a net charge density. As seen
in Fig 2.23, the positive ends of the dipoles remain
unneutralised at the right surface and the negative ends at
the left surface. The unbalanced charges are the induced
charges due to the external field.
Thus, the polarised dielectric is equivalent to two charged
surfaces with induced surface charge densities, say sp
and –sp. Clearly, the field produced by these surface charges
opposes the external field. The total field in the dielectric
is, thereby, reduced from the case when no dielectric is
present. We should note that the surface charge density
±sp arises from bound (not free charges) in the dielectric.
2.11  CAPACITORS AND CAPACITANCE
A capacitor is a system of two conductors separated by an insulator
(Fig. 2.24). The conductors have charges, say Q1 and Q2, and potentials
V1 and V2. Usually, in practice, the two conductors have charges Q
and – Q, with potential difference V = V1 – V2 between them. We shall
consider only this kind of charge configuration of the capacitor. (Even a
single conductor can be used as a capacitor by assuming the other at
infinity.) The conductors may be so charged by connecting them to the
two terminals of a battery. Q is called the charge of the capacitor, though
this, in fact, is the charge on one of the conductors – the total charge  of
the capacitor  is zero.
The electric field in the region between the
conductors is proportional to the charge Q. That
is, if the charge on the capacitor is, say  doubled,
the electric field will also be doubled at every point.
(This follows from the direct proportionality
between field and charge implied by Coulomb’s
law and the superposition principle.) Now,
potential difference V is the work done per unit
positive charge in taking a small test charge from
the conductor 2 to 1 against the field.
Consequently, V is also proportional to Q, and the
ratio Q/V is a constant:
Q
C
V
=
(2.38)
The constant C is called the capacitance of the capacitor. C is independent
of Q or V, as stated above. The capacitance C depends only on the
FIGURE 2.23 A uniformly
polarised dielectric amounts
to induced surface charge
density, but no volume
charge density.
FIGURE 2.24 A system of two conductors
separated by an insulator forms a capacitor.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 24 :
 Physics
68
geometrical configuration (shape, size, separation) of the system of two
conductors. [As we shall see later, it also depends on the nature of the
insulator (dielectric) separating the two conductors.]  The SI unit of
capacitance is 1 farad (=1 coulomb volt-1) or 1 F = 1 C V–1. A capacitor
with fixed capacitance is symbolically shown as ---||---, while the one with
variable capacitance is shown as  
.
Equation (2.38) shows that for large C, V is small for a given Q. This
means a capacitor with large capacitance can hold large amount of charge
Q at a relatively small V. This is of practical importance. High potential
difference implies strong electric field around the conductors. A strong
electric field can ionise the surrounding air and accelerate the charges so
produced to the oppositely charged plates, thereby neutralising the charge
on the capacitor plates, at least partly. In other words, the charge of the
capacitor leaks away due to the reduction in insulating power of the
intervening medium.
The maximum electric field that a dielectric medium can withstand
without break-down (of its insulating property) is called its dielectric
strength; for air it is about 3 × 106 Vm–1. For a separation between
conductors of the order of 1 cm or so, this field corresponds to a potential
difference of 3 × 104 V between the conductors. Thus, for a capacitor to
store a large amount of charge without  leaking, its capacitance should
be high enough so that the potential difference and hence the electric
field do not exceed the break-down limits. Put differently, there is a limit
to the amount of charge that can be stored on a given capacitor without
significant leaking. In practice, a farad is a very big unit; the most common
units are its sub-multiples 1 mF = 10–6 F, 1 nF = 10–9 F, 1 pF = 10–12 F,
etc. Besides its use in storing charge, a capacitor is a key element of most
ac circuits with important functions, as described in Chapter 7.
2.12  THE PARALLEL PLATE CAPACITOR
A parallel plate capacitor consists of two large plane parallel conducting
plates separated by a small distance (Fig. 2.25). We first take the
intervening medium between the plates to be
vacuum. The effect of a dielectric medium between
the plates is discussed in the next section. Let A be
the area of each plate and d the separation between
them. The two plates have charges Q and –Q. Since
d is much smaller than the linear dimension of the
plates (d2 << A), we can use the result on electric
field by an infinite plane sheet of uniform surface
charge density (Section 1.15). Plate 1 has surface
charge density s = Q/A and plate 2 has a surface
charge density –s. Using Eq. (1.33), the electric field
in different regions is:
Outer region I (region  above the plate 1),
0
0
0
2
2
E
σ
σ
ε
ε
=
−
=
(2.39)
FIGURE 2.25  The parallel plate capacitor.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 25 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
69
Outer region II (region below the plate 2),
0
0
0
2
2
E
σ
σ
ε
ε
=
−
=
(2.40)
In the inner region between the plates 1 and 2, the electric fields due
to the two charged plates add up, giving
0
0
0
0
2
2
Q
E
A
σ
σ
σ
ε
ε
ε
ε
=
+
=
=
(2.41)
The direction of electric field is from the positive to the negative plate.
Thus, the electric field is localised between the two plates and is
uniform throughout. For plates with finite area, this will not be true near
the outer boundaries of the plates. The field lines bend outward at the
edges — an effect called ‘fringing of the field’. By the same token, s will
not be strictly uniform on the entire plate. [E and s are related by Eq.
(2.35).] However, for d2 << A, these effects can be ignored in the regions
sufficiently far from the edges, and the field there is given by Eq. (2.41).
Now for uniform electric field, potential difference is simply the electric
field times the distance between the plates, that is,
0
1 Qd
V
E d
A
ε
=
=
(2.42)
The capacitance C of the parallel plate capacitor is then
Q
C
V
=
 = 
0A
d
ε
=
(2.43)
which, as expected, depends only on the geometry of the system. For
typical values like A = 1 m2, d = 1 mm, we get
12
2
–1
–2
2
9
3
8.85
10
C N m
1m
8.85
10
F
10
m
C
−
−
−
×
×
=
=
×
(2.44)
(You can check that if 1F= 1C V–1 = 1C (NC–1m)–1 = 1 C2 N–1m–1.)
This shows that 1F is too big a unit in practice, as remarked earlier.
Another way of seeing the ‘bigness’ of 1F is to calculate the area of the
plates needed to have C = 1F for a separation of, say 1 cm:
0
Cd
A
ε
=
=
2
9
2
12
2
–1
–2
1F
10
m
10 m
8.85
10
C N m
−
−
×
=
×
(2.45)
which is a plate about 30 km in length and breadth!
2.13  EFFECT OF DIELECTRIC ON CAPACITANCE
With the understanding of the behaviour of dielectrics in an external
field developed in Section 2.10, let us see how the capacitance of a parallel
plate capacitor is modified when a dielectric is present. As before, we
have two large plates, each of area A, separated by a distance d. The
charge on the plates is ±Q, corresponding to the charge density ±s (with
s = Q/A). When there is vacuum between the plates,
0
0
E
σ
ε
=
Factors affecting capacitance, capacitors in action
Interactive Java tutorial
http://micro.magnet.fsu.edu/electromag/java/capacitance/
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 26 :
 Physics
70
and the potential difference  V0 is
V0 = E0d
The capacitance C0 in this case is
0
0
0
Q
A
C
V
d
ε
=
=
(2.46)
Consider next a dielectric inserted between the plates fully occupying
the intervening region. The dielectric is polarised by the field and, as
explained in Section 2.10, the effect is equivalent to two charged sheets
(at the surfaces of the dielectric normal to the field) with surface charge
densities sp and –sp. The electric field in the dielectric then corresponds
to the case when the net surface charge density on the plates is ±(s – sp).
That is,
0
P
E
σ
σ
ε
−
=
(2.47)
so that the potential difference across the plates is
0
P
V
E d
d
σ
σ
ε
−
=
=
(2.48)
For linear dielectrics, we expect sp to be proportional to E0, i.e., to s.
Thus, (s – sp) is proportional to s  and we can write
P
K
σ
σ
σ
−
=
(2.49)
where K is a constant characteristic of the dielectric. Clearly,  K > 1. We
then have
0
0
d
Qd
V
K
A
K
σ
ε
ε
=
=
(2.50)
The capacitance C, with dielectric between the plates, is then
0KA
Q
C
V
d
ε
=
=
(2.51)
 The product e0K is called the permittivity of the medium and is
denoted by e
e = e0 K
(2.52)
For vacuum K = 1 and e = e0; e0 is called the permittivity of the vacuum.
The dimensionless ratio
0
K
ε
ε
=
(2.53)
is called the dielectric constant of the substance. As remarked before,
from Eq. (2.49), it is clear that K is greater than 1. From Eqs. (2.46) and
(2. 51)
0
C
K
C
=
(2.54)
Thus, the dielectric constant of a substance is the factor (>1) by which
the capacitance increases from its vacuum value, when the dielectric is
inserted fully between the plates of a capacitor. Though we arrived at
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 27 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
71
 EXAMPLE 2.8
Eq. (2.54) for the case of a parallel plate capacitor, it holds good for any
type of capacitor and can, in fact, be viewed in general as a definition of
the dielectric constant of a substance.
Example 2.8 A slab of material of dielectric constant K has the same
area as the plates of a parallel-plate capacitor but has a thickness
(3/4)d, where d is the separation of the plates. How is the capacitance
changed when the slab is inserted between the plates?
Solution Let  E0 = V0/d be the electric field between the plates when
there is no dielectric and the potential difference is V0. If the dielectric
is now inserted, the electric field in the dielectric will be E = E0/K.
The potential difference will then be
0
0
1
3
(
)
(
)
4
4
E
V
E
d
d
K
=
+
0
0
1
3
3
(
)
4
4
4
K
E d
V
K
K
+
=
+
=
The potential difference decreases by the factor (K + 3)/4K while the
free charge Q0 on the plates remains unchanged. The capacitance
thus increases
0
0
0
0
4
4
3
3
Q
Q
K
K
C
C
V
K
V
K
=
=
=
+
+
2.14  COMBINATION OF CAPACITORS
We can combine several capacitors of
capacitance C1, C2,…, Cn to obtain a system with
some effective capacitance C. The effective
capacitance depends on the way the individual
capacitors are combined. Two simple
possibilities are discussed below.
2.14.1  Capacitors in series
Figure 2.26 shows capacitors C1 and C2
combined in series.
The left plate of C1 and the right plate of C2
are connected to two terminals of a battery and
have charges Q and –Q , respectively. It then
follows that the right plate of C1 has charge –Q
and the left plate of C2  has charge Q. If this was
not so, the net charge on each capacitor would
not be zero. This would result in an electric field
in the conductor connecting C1and C2. Charge
would flow until the net charge on both C1 and
C2 is zero and there is no electric field in the
conductor connecting C1 and C2. Thus, in the
series combination, charges on the two plates
(±Q) are the same on each capacitor. The total
FIGURE 2.26  Combination of two
capacitors in series.
FIGURE 2.27  Combination of n
capacitors in series.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 28 :
 Physics
72
potential drop V across the combination is the sum of the potential drops
V1 and V2 across C1 and C2, respectively.
V = V1 + V2 = 
1
2
Q
Q
C
C
+
(2.55)
i.e., 
1
2
1
1
V
Q
C
C
=
+
,
(2.56)
Now we can regard the combination as an effective capacitor with
charge Q and potential difference V. The effective capacitance of the
combination is
Q
C
V
=
(2.57)
We compare Eq. (2.57) with Eq. (2.56), and obtain
1
2
1
1
1
C
C
C
=
+
(2.58)
The proof clearly goes through for any number of capacitors arranged
in a similar way. Equation (2.55), for n capacitors arranged in series,
generalises to
1
2
n
1
2
n
...
...
Q
Q
Q
V
V
V
V
C
C
C
=
+
+
+
=
+
+
+
(2.59)
Following the same steps as for the case of two
capacitors, we get the general formula for effective
capacitance of a series combination of n capacitors:
1
2
3
n
1
1
1
1
1
...
C
C
C
C
C
=
+
+
+
+
(2.60)
2.14.2  Capacitors in parallel
Figure 2.28 (a) shows two capacitors arranged in
parallel. In this case, the same potential difference is
applied across both the capacitors. But the plate charges
(±Q1) on capacitor 1 and the plate charges (±Q2) on the
capacitor 2 are not necessarily the same:
Q1 = C1V, Q2 = C2V
(2.61)
The equivalent capacitor is one with charge
Q = Q1 + Q2
(2.62)
and potential difference V.
Q = CV = C1V + C2V
(2.63)
The effective capacitance C is, from Eq. (2.63),
C = C1 + C2
(2.64)
The general formula for effective capacitance C for
parallel combination of n capacitors [Fig. 2.28 (b)]
follows similarly,
Q = Q1 + Q2 + ... + Qn
(2.65)
i.e., CV = C1V + C2V + ... CnV(2.66)
which gives
C = C1 + C2 + ... Cn
(2.67)
FIGURE 2.28 Parallel combination of
(a) two capacitors, (b) n capacitors.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 29 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
73
 EXAMPLE 2.9
FIGURE 2.29
Example 2.9 A network of four 10 mF capacitors is connected to a 500 V
supply, as shown in Fig. 2.29. Determine (a) the equivalent capacitance
of the network and (b) the charge on each capacitor. (Note, the charge on
a capacitor is the charge on the plate with higher potential, equal and
opposite to the charge on the plate with lower potential.)
Solution
(a) In the given network, C1, C2 and C3 are connected in series. The
effective capacitance C¢ of these three capacitors is given by
1
2
3
1
1
1
1
C
C
C
C
=
+
+
′
For C1 = C2 = C3 = 10 mF,  C¢ = (10/3) mF. The network has  C¢ and C4
connected in parallel. Thus, the equivalent capacitance C of the
network is
C = C¢ + C4 = 10
3
10
+



 mF =13.3mF
(b) Clearly, from the figure, the charge on each of the capacitors, C1,
C2 and C3 is the same, say Q. Let the charge on C4 be Q¢. Now, since
the potential difference across AB is  Q/C1, across BC is Q/C2, across
CD is  Q/C3 , we have
1
2
3
500 V
Q
Q
Q
C
C
C
+
+
=
.
Also, Q¢/C4 = 500 V.
This gives for the given value of the capacitances,
3
10
500
F
1.7
10
C
3
Q
V
−
=
×
µ
=
×
 and
3
500
10 F
5.0
10
C
Q
V
−
=
×
µ
=
×
′
2.15  ENERGY STORED IN A CAPACITOR
A capacitor, as we have seen above, is a system of two conductors with
charge Q and –Q. To determine the energy stored in this configuration,
consider initially two uncharged conductors 1 and 2. Imagine next a
process of transferring charge from conductor 2 to conductor 1 bit by
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 30 :
 Physics
74
bit, so that at the end, conductor 1 gets charge Q. By
charge conservation, conductor 2 has charge –Q at
the end (Fig 2.30 ).
In transferring positive charge from conductor 2
to conductor 1, work will be done externally, since at
any stage conductor 1 is at a higher potential than
conductor 2. To calculate the total work done, we first
calculate the work done in a small step involving
transfer of an infinitesimal (i.e., vanishingly small)
amount of charge. Consider the intermediate situation
when the conductors 1 and 2 have charges Q¢ and
–Q¢ respectively. At this stage, the potential difference
V¢ between conductors 1 to 2 is Q¢/C, where C is the
capacitance of the system. Next imagine that a small
charge d Q¢ is transferred from conductor 2 to 1. Work
done in this step (d W), resulting in charge Q¢ on
conductor 1 increasing to Q¢+ d Q¢, is given by
Q
W
V
Q
Q
C
δ
δ
δ
′
=
=
′
′
′
(2.68)
Integrating eq. (2.68)
W
Q
C
Q
C
Q
Q
C
Q
Q
=
′
=
′
=
∫
0
2
0
2
1
2
2
δ
’
We can write the final result, in different ways
2
2
1
1
2
2
2
Q
W
CV
QV
C
=
=
=
(2.69)
Since electrostatic force is conservative, this work is stored in the form
of potential energy of the system. For the same reason, the final result for
potential energy [Eq. (2.69)] is independent of the manner in which the
charge configuration of the capacitor is built up. When the capacitor
discharges, this stored-up energy is released. It is possible to view the
potential energy of the capacitor as ‘stored’ in the electric field between
the plates. To see this, consider for simplicity, a parallel plate capacitor
[of area A (of each plate) and separation d between the plates].
Energy stored in the capacitor
= 
2
2
0
1
(
)
2
2
Q
A
d
C
A
σ
ε
=
×
(2.70)
The surface charge density s is related to the electric field E between
the plates,
0
E
σ
ε
=
(2.71)
From Eqs. (2.70) and (2.71) , we get
Energy stored in the capacitor
U = (
)
2
0
1/2
E
A d
ε
×
(2.72)
FIGURE 2.30 (a) Work done in a small
step of building charge on conductor 1
from Q¢ to Q¢ + d Q¢. (b)  Total work done
in charging the capacitor may be
viewed as stored in the energy of
electric field between the plates.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 31 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
75
 EXAMPLE 2.10
Note that Ad is the volume of the region between the plates (where
electric field alone exists). If we define energy density as energy stored
per unit volume of space, Eq (2.72) shows that
Energy density of electric field,
u =(1/2)e0E 2
(2.73)
Though we derived Eq. (2.73) for the case of a parallel plate
capacitor, the result on energy density of an electric field is, in fact,
very general and holds true for electric field due to any configuration
of charges.
Example 2.10 (a) A 900 pF capacitor is charged by 100 V battery
[Fig. 2.31(a)]. How much electrostatic energy is stored by the capacitor?
(b) The capacitor is disconnected from the battery and connected to
another 900 pF capacitor [Fig. 2.31(b)]. What is the electrostatic
energy stored by the system?
FIGURE 2.31
Solution
(a) The charge on the capacitor is
      Q = CV = 900 × 10–12 F × 100 V = 9 × 10–8 C
The energy stored by the capacitor is
      = (1/2) CV 2 = (1/2) QV
= (1/2) × 9 × 10–8C × 100 V = 4.5 × 10–6 J
(b) In the steady situation, the two capacitors have their positive
plates at the same potential, and their negative plates at the
same potential. Let the common potential difference be V¢. The
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 32 :
 Physics
76
charge on each capacitor is then Q¢ = CV¢. By charge conservation,
Q¢  = Q/2. This implies V¢  = V/2. The total energy of the system is
6
1
1
2
'
'
2.25
10
J
2
4
Q V
QV
−
=
×
=
=
×
Thus in going from (a) to (b), though no charge is lost; the final
energy is only half the initial energy. Where has the remaining energy
gone?
There is a transient period before the system settles to the
situation (b). During this period, a transient current flows from
the first capacitor to the second. Energy is lost during this time in
the form of heat and electromagnetic radiation.
 EXAMPLE 2.10
SUMMARY
1.
Electrostatic force is a conservative force. Work done by an external
force (equal and opposite to the electrostatic force) in bringing a charge
q from a point R to a point P is q(VP–VR), which is the difference in
potential energy of charge q between the final and initial points.
2.
Potential at a point is the work done per unit charge (by an external
agency) in bringing a charge from infinity to that point. Potential at a
point is arbitrary to within an additive constant, since it is the potential
difference between two points which is physically significant. If potential
at infinity is chosen to be zero; potential at a point with position vector
r due to a point charge Q placed at the origin is given is given by
1
( )
4
o
Q
V
r
ε
=
π
r
3.
The electrostatic potential at a point with position vector r due to a
point dipole of dipole moment p placed at the origin is
2
ˆ
1
( )
4 ε
=
π
p.r
r
o
V
r
The result is true also for a dipole (with charges –q and q separated by
2a)  for r >> a.
4.
For a charge configuration q1, q2, ..., qn with position vectors r1,
r2, ... rn, the potential at a point P is given by the superposition principle
1
2
0
1P
2P
P
1
(
...
)
4
n
n
q
q
q
V
r
r
r
ε
=
+
+
+
π
where r1P is the distance between q1 and P, as and so on.
5.
An equipotential surface is a surface over which potential has a constant
value. For a point charge, concentric spheres centred at a location of the
charge are equipotential surfaces. The electric field E at a point is
perpendicular to the equipotential surface through the point. E is in the
direction of the steepest decrease of potential.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 33 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
77
6.
Potential energy stored in a system of charges is the work done (by an
external agency) in assembling the charges at their locations. Potential
energy of two charges q1, q2 at r1, r2 is given by
1
2
0
12
1
4
q q
U
r
ε
=
π
where r12 is distance between q1 and q2.
7.
The potential energy of a charge q in an external potential V(r) is qV(r).
The potential energy of a dipole moment p in a uniform electric field E
is  –p.E.
 8. Electrostatics field E is zero in the interior of a conductor; just outside
the surface of a charged conductor, E is normal to the surface given by
0
ˆ
σ
ε
=
E
n  where ˆn  is the unit vector along the outward normal to the
surface and s is the surface charge density. Charges in a conductor can
reside only at its surface. Potential is constant within and on the surface
of a conductor. In a cavity within a conductor (with no charges), the
electric field is zero.
9.
 A capacitor is a system of two conductors separated by an insulator. Its
capacitance is defined by C = Q/V, where Q and –Q are the charges on the
two conductors and V is the potential difference between them. C is
determined purely geometrically, by the shapes, sizes and relative
positions of the two conductors. The unit of capacitance is farad:,
1 F = 1 C V –1. For a parallel plate capacitor (with vacuum between the
plates),
C = 
0
A
d
ε
where A is the area of each plate and d the separation between them.
10. If the medium between the plates of a capacitor is filled with an insulating
substance (dielectric), the electric field due to the charged plates induces
a net dipole moment in the dielectric. This effect, called polarisation,
gives rise to a field in the opposite direction. The net electric field inside
the dielectric and hence the potential difference between the plates is
thus reduced. Consequently, the capacitance C increases from its value
C0 when there is no medium (vacuum),
C = KC0
where K is the dielectric constant of the insulating substance.
11. For capacitors in the series combination, the total capacitance C is given by
1
2
3
1
1
1
1
...
C
C
C
C
=
+
+
+
In the parallel combination, the total capacitance C is:
C =  C1 + C2 + C3 + ...
where C1, C2, C3... are individual capacitances.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 34 :
 Physics
78
12. The energy U stored in a capacitor of capacitance C, with charge Q and
voltage V is
U
QV
CV
Q
C
=
=
=
1
2
1
2
1
2
2
2
The electric energy density (energy per unit volume) in a region with
electric field is (1/2)e0E2.
Physical quantity
Symbol
Dimensions
Unit
 Remark
Potential
 or V
[M1 L2 T–3 A–1]
V
Potential difference is
physically significant
Capacitance
C
[M–1 L–2 T–4 A2]
F
Polarisation
P
[L–2 AT]
C m-2
Dipole moment per unit
volume
Dielectric constant
K
[Dimensionless]
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
Electrostatics deals with forces between charges at rest. But if there is a
force on a charge, how can it be at rest? Thus, when we are talking of
electrostatic force between charges, it should be understood that each
charge is being kept at rest by some unspecified force that opposes the
net Coulomb force on the charge.
2.
A capacitor is so configured that it confines the electric field lines within
a small region of space. Thus, even though field may have considerable
strength, the potential difference between the two conductors of a
capacitor is small.
3.
Electric field is discontinuous across the surface of a spherical charged
shell. It is zero inside and σε0 ˆn outside. Electric potential is, however
continuous across the surface, equal to q/4pe0R  at the surface.
4.
The torque p × E on a dipole causes it to oscillate about E. Only if there
is a dissipative mechanism, the oscillations are damped and the dipole
eventually aligns with E.
5.
Potential due to a charge q at its own location is not defined – it is
infinite.
6.
In the expression qV (r) for potential energy of a charge q, V (r) is the
potential due to external charges and not the potential due to q. As seen
in point 5, this expression will be ill-defined if V (r) includes potential
due to a charge q itself.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 35 :
 Electrostatic Potential
and Capacitance
79
7.
A cavity inside a conductor is shielded from outside electrical influences.
It is worth noting that electrostatic shielding does not work the other
way round; that is, if you put charges inside the cavity, the exterior of
the conductor is not shielded from the fields by the inside charges.
EXERCISES
2.1
Two charges 5 × 10–8 C and –3 × 10–8 C are located 16 cm apart. At
what point(s) on the line joining the two charges is the electric
potential zero? Take the potential at infinity to be zero.
2.2
A regular hexagon of side 10 cm has a charge 5 mC at each of its
vertices. Calculate the potential at the centre of the hexagon.
2.3
Two charges 2 mC and –2 mC are placed at points A and B 6 cm
apart.
(a)
Identify an equipotential surface of the system.
(b)
What is the direction of the electric field at every point on this
surface?
2.4
A spherical conductor of radius 12 cm has a charge of 1.6 × 10–7C
distributed uniformly on its surface. What is the electric field
(a)
inside the sphere
(b)
just outside the sphere
(c)
at a point 18 cm from the centre of the sphere?
2.5
A parallel plate capacitor with air between the plates has a
capacitance of 8 pF (1pF = 10–12 F). What will be the capacitance if
the distance between the plates is reduced by half, and the space
between them is filled with a substance of dielectric constant 6?
2.6
Three capacitors each of capacitance 9 pF are connected in series.
(a)
What is the total capacitance of the combination?
(b)
What is the potential difference across each capacitor if the
combination is connected to a 120 V supply?
2.7
Three capacitors of capacitances 2 pF, 3 pF and 4 pF are connected
in parallel.
(a)
What is the total capacitance of the combination?
(b)
Determine the charge on each capacitor if the combination is
connected to a 100 V supply.
2.8
In a parallel plate capacitor with air between the plates, each plate
has an area of 6 × 10–3 m2 and the distance between the plates is 3 mm.
Calculate the capacitance of the capacitor. If this capacitor is
connected to a 100 V supply, what is the charge on each plate of the
capacitor?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 36 :
 Physics
80
2.9
Explain what would happen if in the capacitor given in Exercise
2.8, a 3 mm thick mica sheet (of dielectric constant = 6) were inserted
between the plates,
(a)
while the voltage supply remained connected.
(b)
after the supply was disconnected.
2.10
A 12pF capacitor is connected to a 50V battery. How much
electrostatic energy is stored in the capacitor?
2.11
A 600pF capacitor is charged by a 200V supply. It is then
disconnected from the supply and is connected to another
uncharged 600 pF capacitor. How much electrostatic energy is lost
in the process?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 1 :
 3.1  INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 1, all charges whether free or bound, were considered to be at
rest. Charges in motion constitute an electric current. Such currents occur
naturally in many situations. Lightning is one such phenomenon in
which charges flow from the clouds to the earth through the atmosphere,
sometimes with disastrous results. The flow of charges in lightning is not
steady, but in our everyday life we see many devices where charges flow
in a steady manner, like water flowing smoothly in a river. A torch and a
cell-driven clock are examples of such devices. In the present chapter, we
shall study some of the basic laws concerning steady electric currents.
3.2  ELECTRIC CURRENT
Imagine a small area held normal to the direction of flow of charges. Both
the positive and the negative charges may flow forward and backward
across the area. In a given time interval t, let q+ be the net amount (i.e.,
forward minus backward) of positive charge that flows in the forward
direction across the area. Similarly, let q– be the net amount of negative
charge flowing across the area in the forward direction. The net amount
of charge flowing across the area in the forward direction in the time
interval t, then, is q = q+– q–. This is proportional to t for steady current
Chapter Three
CURRENT
ELECTRICITY
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 2 :
 Physics
82
and the quotient
q
I
t
=
(3.1)
is defined to be the current across the area in the forward direction. (If it
turn out to be a negative number, it implies a current in the backward
direction.)
Currents are not always steady and hence more generally, we define
the current as follows. Let DQ be the net charge flowing across a cross-
section of a conductor during the time interval Dt [i.e., between times t
and (t + Dt)]. Then, the current at time t across the cross-section of the
conductor is defined as the value of the ratio of DQ to Dt in the limit of Dt
tending to zero,
( )
0
lim
t
Q
I t
t
∆→
∆
≡
∆
(3.2)
In SI units, the unit of current is ampere. An ampere is defined
through magnetic effects of currents that we will study in the following
chapter. An ampere is typically the order of magnitude of currents in
domestic appliances. An average lightning carries currents of the order
of tens of thousands of amperes and at the other extreme, currents in
our nerves are in microamperes.
3.3 ELECTRIC CURRENTS IN CONDUCTORS
An electric charge will experience a force if an electric field is applied. If it is
free to move, it will thus move contributing to a current. In nature, free
charged particles do exist like in upper strata of atmosphere called the
ionosphere. However, in atoms and molecules, the negatively charged
electrons and the positively charged nuclei are bound to each other and
are thus not free to move. Bulk matter is made up of many molecules, a
gram of water, for example, contains approximately 1022 molecules. These
molecules are so closely packed that the electrons are no longer attached
to individual nuclei. In some materials, the electrons will still be bound,
i.e., they will not accelerate even if an electric field is applied. In other
materials, notably metals, some of the electrons are practically free to move
within the bulk material. These materials, generally called conductors,
develop electric currents in them when an electric field is applied.
If we consider solid conductors, then of course the atoms are tightly
bound to each other so that the current is carried by the negatively
charged electrons. There are, however, other types of conductors like
electrolytic solutions where positive and negative charges both can move.
In our discussions, we will focus only on solid conductors so that the
current is carried by the negatively charged electrons in the background
of fixed positive ions.
Consider first the case when no electric field is present. The electrons
will be moving due to thermal motion during which they collide with the
fixed ions. An electron colliding with an ion emerges with the same speed
as before the collision. However, the direction of its velocity after the
collision is completely random. At a given time, there is no preferential
direction for the velocities of the electrons. Thus on the average, the
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 3 :
 Current
Electricity
83
number of electrons travelling in any direction will be equal to the number
of electrons travelling in the opposite direction. So, there will be no net
electric current.
Let us now see what happens to such a
piece of conductor if an electric field is applied.
To focus our thoughts, imagine the conductor
in the shape of a cylinder of radius R (Fig. 3.1).
Suppose we now take two thin circular discs
of a dielectric of the same radius and put
positive charge +Q distributed over one disc
and similarly –Q at the other disc. We attach
the two discs on the two flat surfaces of the
cylinder. An electric field will be created and
is directed from the positive towards the
negative charge. The electrons will be accelerated due to this field towards
+Q. They will thus move to neutralise the charges. The electrons, as long
as they are moving, will constitute an electric current. Hence in the
situation considered, there will be a current for a very short while and no
current thereafter.
We can also imagine a mechanism where the ends of the cylinder are
supplied with fresh charges to make up for any charges neutralised by
electrons moving inside the conductor. In that case, there will be a steady
electric field in the body of the conductor. This will result in a continuous
current rather than a current for a short period of time. Mechanisms,
which maintain a steady electric field are cells or batteries that we shall
study  later in this chapter. In the next sections, we shall study the steady
current that results from a steady electric field in conductors.
3.4  OHM’S LAW
A basic law regarding flow of currents was discovered by G.S. Ohm in
1828, long before the physical mechanism responsible for flow of currents
was discovered. Imagine a conductor through which a current I is flowing
and let V be the potential difference between the ends of the conductor.
Then Ohm’s law states that
     V µ I
or, V = R I
(3.3)
where the constant of proportionality R is called the resistance of the
conductor. The SI units of resistance is ohm, and is denoted by the symbol
W. The resistance R not only depends on the material of the conductor
but also on the dimensions of the conductor. The dependence of R on the
dimensions of the conductor can easily be determined as follows.
Consider a conductor satisfying Eq. (3.3) to be in the form of a slab of
length l and cross sectional area A [Fig. 3.2(a)]. Imagine placing two such
identical slabs side by side [Fig. 3.2(b)], so that the length of the
combination is 2l. The current flowing through the  combination is the
same as that flowing through either of the slabs. If V is the potential
difference across the ends of the first slab, then V is also the potential
difference across the ends of the second slab since the second slab is
FIGURE 3.1 Charges +Q and –Q put at the ends
of a metallic cylinder. The electrons will drift
because of the electric field created to
neutralise the charges. The current thus
will stop after a while unless the charges +Q
and –Q are continuously replenished.
FIGURE 3.2
Illustrating the
relation R = rl/A for
a rectangular slab
of length l and area
of cross-section A.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 4 :
 Physics
84
identical to the first and the same current I flows through
both. The potential difference across the ends of the
combination is clearly sum of the potential difference
across the two individual slabs and hence equals 2V. The
current through the combination is I and the resistance
of the combination RC is [from Eq. (3.3)],
2
2
C
V
R
R
I
=
=
(3.4)
since V/I = R, the resistance of either of the slabs. Thus,
doubling the length of a conductor doubles the
resistance. In general, then resistance is proportional to
length,
R
l
∝
(3.5)
Next, imagine dividing the slab into two by cutting it
lengthwise so that the slab can be considered as a
combination of two identical slabs of length l, but each
having a cross sectional  area of A/2 [Fig. 3.2(c)].
For a given voltage V across the slab, if I is the current
through the entire slab, then clearly the current flowing
through each of the two half-slabs is I/2. Since the
potential difference across the ends of the half-slabs is V,
i.e., the same as across the full slab, the resistance of each
of the half-slabs R1 is
1
2
2 .
( /2)
V
V
R
R
I
I
=
=
=
(3.6)
Thus, halving the area of the cross-section of a conductor doubles
the resistance. In general, then the resistance R is inversely proportional
to the cross-sectional area,
1
R
A
∝
(3.7)
Combining Eqs. (3.5) and (3.7), we have
l
R
A
∝
(3.8)
and hence for a given conductor
l
R
A
ρ
=
(3.9)
where the constant of proportionality r depends on the material of the
conductor but not on its dimensions. r is called resistivity.
Using the last equation, Ohm’s law reads
I l
V
I
R
A
ρ
=
×
=
(3.10)
Current per unit area (taken normal to the current), I/A, is called
current density and is denoted by j. The SI units of the current density
are A/m2. Further, if E is the magnitude of uniform electric field in the
conductor whose length is l, then the potential difference V across its
ends is El. Using these, the last equation reads
GEORG SIMON OHM (1787–1854)
Georg Simon Ohm  (1787–
1854) German physicist,
professor at Munich. Ohm
was led to his law by an
analogy 
between 
the
conduction of heat: the
electric field is analogous to
the temperature gradient,
and the electric current is
analogous to the heat flow.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 5 :
 Current
Electricity
85
        E l = j r l
or,    E = j r
(3.11)
The above relation for magnitudes E and j can indeed be cast in a
vector  form. The current density, (which we have defined as the current
through unit area normal to the current) is also directed along E, and is
also a vector j (ººººº j E/E). Thus, the last equation can be written as,
        E = jr
(3.12)
or,   j = s E
(3.13)
where s º1/r is called the conductivity. Ohm’s law is often stated in an
equivalent form, Eq. (3.13) in addition to Eq.(3.3). In the next section, we
will try to understand the origin of the Ohm’s law as arising from the
characteristics of the drift of electrons.
3.5 DRIFT OF ELECTRONS AND THE ORIGIN
OF RESISTIVITY
As remarked before, an electron will suffer collisions with the heavy fixed
ions, but after collision, it will emerge with the same speed but in random
directions. If we consider all the electrons, their average velocity will be
zero since their directions are random. Thus, if there are N electrons and
the velocity of the ith electron (i = 1, 2, 3, ... N ) at a given time is vi, then
1
0
1
N
i
i
v =
=∑
N
(3.14)
Consider now the situation when an electric field is
present. Electrons will be accelerated due to this
field by
= – E
a
e
m
(3.15)
where –e is the charge and m is the mass of an electron.
Consider again the ith electron at a given time t. This
electron would have had its last collision some time
before t, and let ti be the time elapsed after its last
collision. If vi was its velocity immediately after the last
collision, then its velocity Vi at time t is
−
 
=
+
  
E
V
v
i
i
i
e
t
m
(3.16)
since starting with its last collision it was accelerated
(Fig. 3.3) with an acceleration given by Eq. (3.15) for a
time interval ti. The average velocity of the electrons at
time t is the average of all the Vi’s. The average of vi’s is
zero [Eq. (3.14)] since immediately after any collision,
the direction of the velocity of an electron is completely
random. The collisions of the electrons do not occur at
regular intervals but at random times. Let us denote by
t, the average time between successive collisions. Then
at a given time, some of the electrons would have spent
FIGURE 3.3 A schematic picture of
an electron moving from a point A to
another point B through repeated
collisions, and straight line travel
between collisions (full lines). If an
electric field is applied as shown, the
electron ends up at point B¢ (dotted
lines). A slight drift in a direction
opposite the electric field is visible.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 6 :
 Physics
86
time more than t and some less than t. In other words, the time ti in
Eq. (3.16) will be less than t for some and more than t for others as we go
through the values of i = 1, 2 ..... N. The average value of ti then is t
(known as relaxation time). Thus, averaging Eq. (3.16) over the
N-electrons at any given time t gives us for the average velocity vd
(
)
(
)
( )
≡
=
−
E
v
V
v
d
i
i
i
average
average
average
e
t
m
0 –
τ
τ
=
= −
E
E
e
e
m
m
(3.17)
This last result is surprising. It tells us that the
electrons move with an average velocity which is
independent of time, although electrons are
accelerated. This is the phenomenon of drift and the
velocity vd in Eq. (3.17) is called the drift velocity.
Because of the drift, there will be net transport of
charges across any area perpendicular to E. Consider
a planar area A, located inside the conductor such that
the normal to the area is parallel to E (Fig. 3.4). Then
because of the drift, in an infinitesimal amount of time
Dt, all electrons to the left of the area at distances upto
|vd|Dt would have crossed the area. If n is the number
of free electrons per unit volume in the metal, then
there are n Dt |vd|A such electrons. Since each
electron carries a charge –e, the total charge transported across this area
A to the right in time Dt is –ne A|vd|Dt. E is directed towards the left and
hence the total charge transported along E across the area is negative of
this. The amount of charge crossing the area A in time Dt is by definition
[Eq. (3.2)] I Dt, where I is the magnitude of the current. Hence,
v
∆= +
∆
d
I
t
n e A
t
(3.18)
Substituting the value of |vd| from Eq. (3.17)
2
E
τ
∆=
∆
e A
I t
n
t
m
(3.19)
By definition I is related to the magnitude |j| of the current density by
I = |j|A
(3.20)
Hence, from Eqs.(3.19) and (3.20),
2
j
E
τ
= ne
m
(3.21)
The vector j is parallel to E and hence we can write Eq. (3.21) in the
vector form
2
τ
=
j
E
ne
m
(3.22)
Comparison with Eq. (3.13) shows that Eq. (3.22) is exactly the Ohm’s
law, if we identify the conductivity s  as
FIGURE 3.4 Current in a metallic
conductor. The magnitude of current
density in a metal is the magnitude of
charge contained in a cylinder of unit
area and length vd.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 7 :
 Current
Electricity
87
 EXAMPLE 3.1
2
ne
m
σ
τ
=
(3.23)
We thus see that a very simple picture of electrical conduction
reproduces Ohm’s law. We have, of course, made assumptions that t
and n are constants, independent of E. We shall, in the next section,
discuss the limitations of Ohm’s law.
Example 3.1 (a) Estimate the average drift speed of conduction
electrons in a copper wire of cross-sectional area 1.0 × 10–7 m2 carrying
a current of 1.5 A. Assume that each copper atom contributes roughly
one conduction electron. The density of copper is 9.0 × 103 kg/m3,
and its atomic mass is 63.5 u. (b) Compare the drift speed obtained
above with, (i) thermal speeds of copper atoms at ordinary
temperatures, (ii) speed of propagation of electric field along the
conductor which causes the drift motion.
Solution
(a) The direction of drift velocity of conduction electrons is opposite
to the electric field direction, i.e., electrons drift in the direction
of increasing potential. The drift speed vd is given by Eq. (3.18)
vd  = (I/neA)
Now, e = 1.6 × 10–19 C, A = 1.0 × 10–7m2, I = 1.5 A. The density of
conduction electrons, n is equal to the number of atoms per cubic
metre (assuming one conduction electron per Cu atom as is
reasonable from its valence electron count of one). A cubic metre
of copper has a mass of 9.0 × 103 kg. Since 6.0 × 1023 copper
atoms have a mass of 63.5 g,
23
6
6.0
10
9.0
10
63.5
n
×
=
×
×
   = 8.5 × 1028 m–3
which gives,
28
–19
–7
1.5
8.5
10
1.6
10
1.0
10
=
×
×
×
×
×
d
v
    = 1.1 × 10–3 m s–1  = 1.1 mm s–1
(b) (i) At a temperature T, the thermal speed* of a copper atom of
mass M is obtained from [<(1/2) Mv2 > = (3/2) kBT ] and is thus
typically of the order of 
/
B
k T M , where kB is the Boltzmann
constant. For copper at 300 K, this is about 2 × 102 m/s. This
figure indicates the random vibrational speeds of copper atoms
in a conductor. Note that the drift speed of electrons is much
smaller, about 10–5 times the typical thermal speed at ordinary
temperatures.
(ii) An electric field travelling along the conductor has a speed of
an electromagnetic wave, namely equal to 3.0 × 108 m s–1
(You will learn about this in Chapter 8). The drift speed is, in
comparison, extremely small; smaller by a factor of 10–11.
*
See Eq. (12.23) of Chapter 12 from Class XI book.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 8 :
 Physics
88
 EXAMPLE 3.2
Example 3.2
(a) In Example 3.1, the electron drift speed is estimated to be only a
few mm s–1 for currents in the range of a few amperes? How then
is current established almost the instant a circuit is closed?
(b) The electron drift arises due to the force experienced by electrons
in the electric field inside the conductor. But force should cause
acceleration. Why then do the electrons acquire a steady average
drift speed?
(c) If the electron drift speed is so small, and the electron’s charge is
small, how can we still obtain large amounts of current in a
conductor?
(d) When electrons drift in a metal from lower to higher potential,
does it mean that all the ‘free’ electrons of the metal are moving
in the same direction?
(e) Are the paths of electrons straight lines between successive
collisions (with the positive ions of the metal) in the (i) absence of
electric field, (ii) presence of electric field?
Solution
(a) Electric field is established throughout the circuit, almost instantly
(with the speed of light) causing at every point a local electron
drift. Establishment of a current does not have to wait for electrons
from one end of the conductor travelling to the other end. However,
it does take a little while for the current to reach its steady value.
(b) Each ‘free’ electron does accelerate, increasing its drift speed until
it collides with a positive ion of the metal. It loses its drift speed
after collision but starts to accelerate and increases its drift speed
again only to suffer a collision again and so on. On the average,
therefore, electrons acquire only a drift speed.
(c) Simple, because the electron number density is enormous,
~1029 m–3.
(d) By no means. The drift velocity is superposed over the large
random velocities of electrons.
(e) In the absence of electric field, the paths are straight lines; in the
presence of electric field, the paths are, in general, curved.
3.5.1  Mobility
As we have seen, conductivity arises from mobile charge carriers. In
metals, these mobile charge carriers are electrons; in an ionised gas, they
are electrons and positive charged ions; in an electrolyte, these can be
both positive and negative ions.
An important quantity is the mobility m defined as the magnitude of
the drift velocity per unit electric field:
|
|
d
E
µ = v
(3.24)
The SI unit of mobility is m2/Vs and is 104 of the mobility in practical
units (cm2/Vs). Mobility is positive. From Eq. (3.17), we have
vd = 
τ
e E
m
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 9 :
 Current
Electricity
89
Hence,
τ
µ =
=
d
v
e
E
m
(3.25)
where t is the average collision time for electrons.
3.6  LIMITATIONS OF OHM’S LAW
Although Ohm’s law has been found valid over a large class
of materials, there do exist materials and devices used in
electric circuits where the proportionality of V and I does not
hold. The deviations broadly are one or more of the following
types:
(a) V ceases to be proportional to I (Fig. 3.5).
(b) The relation between V and I depends on the sign of V. In
other words, if I is the current for a certain V, then reversing
the direction of V keeping its magnitude fixed, does not
produce a current of the same magnitude as I in the opposite direction
(Fig. 3.6). This happens, for example, in a diode which we will study
in Chapter 14.
(c) The relation between V and I is not unique, i.e., there is more than
one value of V for the same current I (Fig. 3.7). A material exhibiting
such behaviour is GaAs.
Materials and devices not obeying Ohm’s law in the form of Eq. (3.3)
are actually widely used in electronic circuits. In this and a few
subsequent chapters, however, we will study the electrical currents in
materials that obey Ohm’s law.
3.7  RESISTIVITY OF VARIOUS MATERIALS
The materials are classified as conductors, semiconductors and insulators
depending on their resistivities, in an increasing order of their values.
FIGURE 3.5 The dashed line
represents the linear Ohm’s
law. The solid line is the voltage
V versus current I for a good
conductor.
FIGURE 3.6 Characteristic curve
of a diode. Note the different
scales for negative and positive
values of the voltage and current.
FIGURE 3.7 Variation of current
versus voltage for GaAs.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 10 :
 Physics
90
Metals have low resistivities in the range of 10–8 Wm to 10–6 Wm. At the
other end are insulators like ceramic, rubber and plastics having
resistivities 1018 times greater than metals or more. In between the two
are the semiconductors. These, however, have resistivities
characteristically decreasing with a rise in temperature. The resistivities
of semiconductors can be decreased by adding small amount of suitable
impurities. This last feature is exploited in use of semiconductors for
electronic devices.
3.8
TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF RESISTIVITY
The resistivity of a material is found to be dependent on the temperature.
Different materials do not exhibit the same dependence on temperatures.
Over a limited range of temperatures, that is not too large, the resistivity
of a metallic conductor is approximately given by,
rT = r0 [1 + a (T–T0)]
(3.26)
where rT is the resistivity at a temperature T and r0 is the same at a
reference temperature T0. a is called the temperature co-efficient of
resistivity, and from Eq. (3.26), the dimension of a is (Temperature)–1.
For  metals, a is positive.
The relation of Eq. (3.26) implies that a graph of rT plotted against T
would be a straight line. At temperatures much lower than 0°C, the graph,
however, deviates considerably from a straight line (Fig. 3.8).
Equation (3.26) thus, can be used approximately over a limited range
of T around any reference temperature T0, where the graph can be
approximated as a straight line.
FIGURE 3.8
Resistivity rT of
copper as a function
of temperature T.
FIGURE 3.9 Resistivity
rT of nichrome as a
function of absolute
temperature T.
FIGURE 3.10
Temperature dependence
of resistivity for a typical
semiconductor.

Some materials like Nichrome (which is an alloy of nickel, iron and
chromium) exhibit a very weak dependence of resistivity with temperature
(Fig. 3.9). Manganin and constantan have similar properties. These
materials are thus widely used in wire bound standard resistors since
their resistance values would change very little with temperatures.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 11 :
 Current
Electricity
91
 EXAMPLE 3.3
Unlike metals, the resistivities of semiconductors decrease with
increasing temperatures. A typical dependence is shown in Fig. 3.10.
We can qualitatively understand the temperature dependence of
resistivity, in the light of our derivation of Eq. (3.23). From this equation,
resistivity of a material is given by
2
1
m
n e
ρ
σ
τ
=
=
(3.27)
r thus depends inversely both on the number n of free electrons per unit
volume and on the average time t between collisions. As we increase
temperature, average speed of the electrons, which act as the carriers of
current, increases resulting in more frequent collisions. The average time
of collisions t, thus decreases with temperature.
In a metal, n is not dependent on temperature to any appreciable
extent and thus the decrease in the value of t with rise in temperature
causes r to increase as we have observed.
For insulators and semiconductors, however, n increases with
temperature. This increase more than compensates any decrease in t in
Eq.(3.23) so that for such materials, r decreases with temperature.
Example 3.3 An electric toaster uses nichrome for its heating
element. When a negligibly small current passes through it, its
resistance at room temperature (27.0 °C) is found to be 75.3 W. When
the toaster is connected to a 230 V supply, the current settles, after
a few seconds, to a steady value of 2.68 A. What is the steady
temperature of the nichrome element? The temperature coefficient
of resistance of nichrome averaged over the temperature range
involved, is 1.70 × 10–4 °C–1.
Solution  When the current through the element is very small, heating
effects can be ignored and the temperature T1 of the element is the
same as room temperature. When the toaster is connected to the
supply, its initial current will be slightly higher than its steady value
of 2.68 A. But due to heating effect of the current, the temperature
will rise. This will cause an increase in resistance and a slight
decrease in current. In a few seconds, a steady state will be reached
when temperature will rise no further, and both the resistance of the
element and the current drawn will achieve steady values. The
resistance R2 at the steady temperature T2 is
R2 
230 V
85.8
2.68 A
=
=
Ω
Using the relation
R2 = R1 [1 + a (T2 – T1)]
with a = 1.70 × 10–4 °C–1, we get
T2 – T1
–4
(85.8 – 75.3)
(75.3) 1.70 10
=
×
×
  = 820 °C
that is,  T2 = (820 + 27.0) °C = 847 °C
Thus, the steady temperature of the heating element (when heating
effect due to the current equals heat loss to the surroundings) is
847 °C.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 12 :
 Physics
92
 EXAMPLE 3.4
Example 3.4 The resistance of the platinum wire of a platinum
resistance thermometer at the ice point is 5 W and at steam point is
5.23 W. When the thermometer is inserted in a hot bath, the resistance
of the platinum wire is 5.795 W. Calculate the temperature of the
bath.
Solution R0 = 5 W, R100 = 5.23 W and Rt = 5.795 W
Now,
0
0
100
0
100,
(1
)
t
t
R
R
t
R
R
t
R
R
α
−
=
×
=
+
−
5.795
5
100
5.23
5
−
=
×
−
= 0.795
100
0.23 ×
 = 345.65 °C
3.9  ELECTRICAL ENERGY, POWER
Consider a conductor with end points A and B, in which a current I is
flowing from A to B. The electric potential at A and B are denoted by V(A)
and V(B) respectively. Since current is flowing from A to B, V(A) > V(B)
and the potential difference across  AB is V = V(A) – V(B) > 0.
In a time interval Dt, an amount of charge DQ = I Dt travels from A to
B. The potential energy of the charge at A, by definition, was Q V(A) and
similarly at B, it is Q V(B). Thus, change in its potential energy DUpot is
DUpot = Final potential energy – Initial potential energy
         = DQ[(V (B) – V (A)] = –DQ V
         = –I VDt < 0
(3.28)
If charges moved without collisions through the conductor, their
kinetic energy would also change so that the total energy is unchanged.
Conservation of total energy would then imply that,
DK =  –DUpot
(3.29)
that is,
DK = I VDt > 0
(3.30)
Thus, in case charges were moving freely through the conductor under
the action of electric field, their kinetic energy would increase as they
move. We have, however, seen earlier that on the average, charge carriers
do not move with acceleration but with a steady drift velocity. This is
because of the collisions with ions and atoms during transit. During
collisions, the energy gained by the charges thus is shared with the atoms.
The atoms vibrate more vigorously, i.e., the conductor heats up. Thus,
in an actual conductor, an amount of energy dissipated as heat in the
conductor during the time interval Dt is,
DW = I VDt
(3.31)
The energy dissipated per unit time is the power dissipated
P = DW/Dt  and we have,
P = I V
(3.32)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 13 :
 Current
Electricity
93
Using Ohm’s law V = IR, we get
P = I 2 R = V 2/R
(3.33)
as the power loss (“ohmic loss”) in a conductor of resistance R carrying a
current I. It is this power which heats up, for example, the coil of an
electric bulb to incandescence, radiating out heat and light.
Where does the power come from? As we have
reasoned before, we need an external source to keep
a steady current through the conductor. It is clearly
this source which must supply this power. In the
simple circuit shown with a cell (Fig.3.11), it is the
chemical energy of the cell which supplies this power
for as long as it can.
The expressions for power, Eqs. (3.32) and (3.33),
show the dependence of the power dissipated in a
resistor R on the current through it and the voltage
across it.
Equation (3.33) has an important application to
power transmission. Electrical power is transmitted
from power stations to homes and factories, which
may be hundreds of miles away, via transmission
cables. One obviously wants to minimise the power
loss in the transmission cables connecting the power stations to homes
and factories. We shall  see now how this can be achieved. Consider a
device R, to which a power P is to be delivered via transmission cables
having a resistance Rc to be dissipated by it finally. If V is the voltage
across R and I the current through it, then
P = V I
(3.34)
The connecting wires from the power station to the device has a finite
resistance Rc. The power dissipated in the connecting wires, which is
wasted is Pc  with
Pc = I 2 Rc
   
2
2
c
P R
V
=
(3.35)
from Eq. (3.32). Thus, to drive a device of power P, the power wasted in the
connecting wires is inversely proportional to V 2. The  transmission cables
from power stations are hundreds of miles long and their resistance Rc is
considerable. To reduce Pc, these wires carry current at enormous values
of V and this is the reason for the high voltage danger signs on transmission
lines — a common sight as we move away from populated areas. Using
electricity at such voltages is not safe and hence at the other end, a device
called a transformer lowers the voltage to a value suitable for use.
3.10 CELLS, EMF, INTERNAL RESISTANCE
We have already mentioned that a simple device to maintain a steady
current in an electric circuit is the electrolytic cell. Basically a cell has
two electrodes, called the positive (P) and the negative (N), as shown in
FIGURE 3.11 Heat is produced in the
resistor R which is connected across
the terminals of a cell. The energy
dissipated in the resistor R comes from
the chemical energy of the electrolyte.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 14 :
 Physics
94
Fig. 3.12. They are immersed in an electrolytic solution. Dipped in
the solution, the electrodes exchange charges with the electrolyte.
The positive electrode has a potential difference V+ (V+ > 0) between
itself and the electrolyte solution immediately adjacent to it marked
A in the figure. Similarly, the negative electrode develops a negative
potential  – (V– ) (V– ≥ 0) relative to the electrolyte adjacent to it,
marked as B in the figure. When there is no current, the electrolyte
has the same potential throughout, so that the potential difference
between P and N is V+ – (–V–) = V+ + V– . This difference is called the
electromotive force (emf) of the cell and is denoted by e. Thus
e = V++V– >  0
(3.36)
Note that e is, actually, a potential difference and not a force. The
name emf, however, is used because of historical reasons, and was
given at a time when the phenomenon was not understood properly.
To understand the significance of e, consider a resistor R
connected across the cell (Fig. 3.12). A current I flows across R
from C to D. As explained before, a steady current is maintained
because current flows from N to P through the electrolyte. Clearly,
across the electrolyte the same current flows through the electrolyte
but from N to P, whereas through R, it flows from P to N.
The electrolyte through which a current flows has a finite
resistance r, called the internal resistance. Consider first the
situation when R is infinite so that I = V/R = 0, where V is the
potential difference between P and N. Now,
V = Potential difference between P and A
       + Potential difference between A and B
       + Potential  difference between B and N
   = e
(3.37)
Thus, emf e is the potential difference between the positive and
negative electrodes in an open circuit, i.e., when no current is
flowing through the cell.
If however R is finite, I is not zero. In that case the potential difference
between P and N is
V = V++ V– – I r
   = e – I r
(3.38)
Note the negative sign in the expression (I r) for the potential difference
between A and B. This is because the current I flows from B to A in the
electrolyte.
In  practical calculations, internal resistances of cells in the circuit
may be neglected when the  current I is such that e >> I r. The actual
values of the internal resistances of cells vary from cell to cell. The internal
resistance of dry cells, however, is much higher than the common
electrolytic cells.
We also observe that since V is the potential difference across R, we
have from Ohm’s law
V = I  R
(3.39)
Combining Eqs. (3.38) and (3.39), we get
FIGURE 3.12 (a) Sketch of
an electrolyte cell with
positive terminal P and
negative terminal N. The
gap between the electrodes
is exaggerated for clarity. A
and B are points in the
electrolyte typically close to
P and N. (b) the symbol for
a cell, + referring to P and
– referring to the N
electrode. Electrical
connections to the cell are
made at P and N.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 15 :
 Current
Electricity
95
I  R   =  e – I  r
Or, I
R
r
=
+
ε
(3.40)
The maximum current that can be drawn from a cell is for R = 0 and
it is Imax = e/r. However, in most cells the maximum allowed current is
much lower than this to prevent permanent damage to the cell.
3.11  CELLS IN SERIES AND IN PARALLEL
Like resistors, cells can be combined together in an electric circuit. And
like resistors, one can, for calculating currents and voltages in a circuit,
replace a combination of cells by an equivalent cell.
FIGURE 3.13 Two cells of emf’s e1 and e2 in the series. r1, r2 are their
internal resistances. For connections across A and C, the combination
can be considered as one cell of emf eeq and an internal resistance req.
Consider first  two cells in series (Fig. 3.13), where one terminal of the
two cells is joined together leaving the other terminal in either cell free.
e1, e2 are the emf’s of the two cells and r1, r2 their internal resistances,
respectively.
Let V (A), V (B), V (C) be the potentials at points A, B and C shown in
Fig. 3.13. Then V (A) – V (B) is the potential difference between the positive
and negative terminals of the first cell. We have already calculated it in
Eq. (3.38) and hence,
V
V
V
I r
AB
A
B
≡
=
(
) 
( )

ε1
1
(3.41)
Similarly,
V
V
V
I r
BC
B
C
≡
=
( ) 
( )

ε2
2
(3.42)
Hence, the potential difference between the terminals A and C of the
combination is
( )
( )
( )
( )
AC
(A)–
(C)
A –
B
B –
C
V
V
V
V
V
V
V
≡
=
+
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
(
)
(
)
1
2
1
2
– I r
r
ε
ε
=
+
+
(3.43)
If we wish to replace the combination by a single cell between A and
C of emf eeq and internal resistance req, we would have
VAC = eeq– I req
(3.44)
Comparing the last two equations, we get
  eeq = e1 + e2
(3.45)
and  req = r1 + r2
(3.46)
In Fig.3.13, we had connected the negative electrode of the first to the
positive electrode of the second. If instead we connect the two negatives,
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 16 :
 Physics
96
Eq. (3.42) would change to VBC = –e2–Ir2 and we will get
eeq = e1 – e2         (e1 > e2)
(3.47)
The rule for series combination clearly can be extended to any number
of cells:
(i)
The equivalent emf of a series combination of n cells is just the sum of
their individual emf’s, and
(ii) The equivalent internal resistance of a series combination of n cells is
just the sum of their internal resistances.
This is so, when the current leaves each cell from the positive
electrode. If in the combination, the current leaves any cell from
the negative electrode, the emf of the cell enters the expression
for eeq with a negative sign, as in Eq. (3.47).
Next, consider a parallel combination of the cells (Fig. 3.14).
I1 and I2 are the currents leaving the positive electrodes of the
cells. At the point B1, I1 and I2 flow in whereas the current I flows
out. Since as much charge flows in as out, we have
I = I1 + I2
(3.48)
Let V (B1) and V (B2) be the potentials at B1 and B2, respectively.
Then, considering the first cell, the potential difference across its
terminals is V (B1) – V (B2). Hence, from Eq. (3.38)
(
)
(
)
1
2
1
1 1
–
–
V
V B
V B
I r
ε
≡
=
(3.49)
Points B1 and B2 are connected exactly similarly to the second
cell. Hence considering the second cell, we also have
(
)
(
)
1
2
2
2 2
–
–
V
V B
V B
I r
ε
≡
=
(3.50)
Combining the last three equations
1
2
 
 
 
 
I
I
I
=
+
    =
+
=
+




+




ε
ε
ε
ε
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
–
–
–
V
r
V
r
r
r
V
r
r
(3.51)
Hence, V is given by,
1 2
2 1
1 2
1
2
1
2
–
r
r
r r
V
I
r
r
r
r
ε
ε
+
=
+
+
(3.52)
If we want to replace the combination by a single cell, between B1 and
B2, of emf eeq and internal resistance req, we would have
V = eeq – I req
(3.53)
The last two equations should be the same and hence
1 2
2 1
1
2
eq
r
r
r
r
ε
ε
ε
+
=
+
(3.54)
1 2
1
2
eq
r r
r
r
r
=
+
(3.55)
We can put these equations in a simpler way,
FIGURE 3.14 Two cells in
parallel. For connections
across A and C, the
combination can be
replaced by one cell of emf
eeq and internal resistances
req whose values are given in
Eqs. (3.54) and (3.55).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 17 :
 Current
Electricity
97
1
2
1
1
1
eq
r
r
r
=
+
(3.56)
1
2
1
2
eq
eq
r
r
r
ε
ε
ε
=
+
(3.57)
In Fig. (3.14), we had joined the positive terminals
together and similarly the two negative ones, so that the
currents I1, I2 flow out of positive terminals. If the negative
terminal of the second is connected to positive terminal
of the first, Eqs. (3.56) and (3.57) would still be valid with
e 2 ® –e2
Equations (3.56) and (3.57) can be extended easily.
If there are n cells of emf e1, . . . en and of internal
resistances r1,... rn respectively, connected in parallel, the
combination is equivalent to a single cell of emf eeq and
internal resistance req, such that
1
1
1
1
r
r
r
eq
n
=
+
+
... 
(3.58)
ε
ε
ε
eq
eq
n
n
r
r
r
=
+
+
1
1
...
(3.59)
3.12  KIRCHHOFF’S RULES
Electric circuits generally consist of a number of resistors
and cells interconnected sometimes in a complicated way.
The formulae we have derived earlier for series and parallel combinations
of resistors are not always sufficient to determine all the currents and
potential differences in the circuit. Two rules, called Kirchhoff’s rules,
are very useful for analysis of electric circuits.
Given a circuit, we start by labelling currents in each resistor by a
symbol, say I, and a directed arrow to indicate that a current I flows
along the resistor in the direction indicated. If ultimately I is determined
to be positive, the actual current in the resistor is in the direction of the
arrow. If I turns out to be negative, the current actually flows in a direction
opposite to the arrow. Similarly, for each source (i.e., cell or some other
source of electrical power) the positive and negative electrodes are labelled,
as well as, a directed arrow with a symbol for the current flowing through
the cell. This will tell us the potential difference, V = V (P) – V (N) = e – I r
[Eq. (3.38) between the positive terminal P and the negative terminal N; I
here is the current flowing from N to P through the cell]. If, while labelling
the current I through the cell one goes from P to N, then of course
V = e + I r
(3.60)
Having clarified labelling, we now state the rules and the proof:
(a)
Junction rule: At any junction, the sum of the currents entering
the junction is equal to the sum of currents leaving the junction
(Fig. 3.15).
Gustav Robert Kirchhoff
(1824 – 1887) German
physicist, professor at
Heidelberg 
and 
at
Berlin. Mainly known for
his 
development 
of
spectroscopy, he also
made many important
contributions to mathe-
matical physics, among
them, his first and
second rules for circuits.
GUSTAV ROBERT KIRCHHOFF (1824 –
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 18 :
 Physics
98
 EXAMPLE 3.5
This applies equally well if instead of a junction of
several lines, we consider a point in a line.
The proof of this rule follows from the fact that
when currents are steady, there is no accumulation
of charges at any junction or at any point in a line.
Thus, the total current flowing in, (which is the rate
at which charge flows into the junction), must equal
the total current flowing out.
(b)
Loop rule: The algebraic sum of changes in
potential around any closed loop involving
resistors and cells in the loop is zero
(Fig. 3.15).
This rule is also obvious, since electric potential is
dependent on the location of the point. Thus
starting with any point if we come back to the same
point, the total change must be zero. In a closed
loop, we do come back to the starting point and
hence the rule.
FIGURE 3.15 At junction a the current
leaving is I1 + I2 and current entering is I3.
The junction rule says I3 = I1 + I2. At point
h current entering is I1. There is only one
current leaving h and by junction rule
that will also be I1. For the loops ‘ahdcba’
and ‘ahdefga’, the loop rules give –30I1 –
41 I3 + 45 = 0 and –30I1 + 21 I2 – 80 = 0.
Example 3.5 A battery of 10 V and negligible internal resistance is
connected across the diagonally opposite corners of a cubical network
consisting of 12 resistors each of resistance 1 W (Fig. 3.16). Determine
the equivalent resistance of the network and the current along each
edge of the cube.
Z
FIGURE 3.16
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 19 :
 Current
Electricity
99
 EXAMPLE 3.5
Similation for application of Kirchhoff’s rules:
http://www.phys.hawaii.edu/~teb/optics/java/kirch3/
 EXAMPLE 3.6
Solution  The network is not reducible to a simple series and parallel
combinations of resistors. There is, however, a clear symmetry in the
problem which we can exploit to obtain the equivalent resistance of
the network.
The paths AA¢, AD and AB are obviously symmetrically placed in the
network. Thus, the current in each must be the same, say, I. Further,
at the corners A¢, B and D, the incoming current I must split equally
into the two outgoing branches. In this manner, the current in all
the 12 edges of the cube are easily written down in terms of I, using
Kirchhoff’s first rule and the symmetry in the problem.
Next take a closed loop, say, ABCC¢EA, and apply Kirchhoff’s second
rule:
–IR – (1/2)IR – IR + e = 0
where R is the resistance of each edge and e the emf of battery. Thus,
e = 5
2 I R
The equivalent resistance Req of the network is
5
3
6
eq
R
R
I
ε
=
=
For R = 1 W, Req = (5/6) W and for e = 10 V, the total current (= 3I) in
the network is
3I = 10 V/(5/6) W = 12 A, i.e., I = 4 A
The current flowing in each edge can now be read off from the
Fig. 3.16.
It should be noted that because of the symmetry of the network, the
great power of Kirchhoff’s rules has not been very apparent in Example 3.5.
In a general network, there will be no such simplification due to symmetry,
and only by application of Kirchhoff’s rules to junctions and closed loops
(as many as necessary to solve the unknowns in the network) can we
handle the problem. This will be illustrated in Example 3.6.
Example 3.6 Determine the current in each branch of the network
shown in Fig. 3.17.
FIGURE 3.17
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 20 :
 Physics
100
 EXAMPLE 3.6
Solution  Each branch of the network is assigned an unknown current
to be determined by the application of Kirchhoff’s rules. To reduce
the number of unknowns at the outset, the first rule of Kirchhoff is
used at every junction to assign the unknown current in each branch.
We then have three unknowns I1, I2 and I3 which can be found by
applying the second rule of Kirchhoff to three different closed loops.
Kirchhoff’s second rule for the closed loop ADCA gives,
10 – 4(I1– I2) + 2(I2 + I3 – I1) – I1 = 0
[3.61(a)]
that is, 7I1– 6I2 – 2I3 = 10
For the closed loop ABCA, we get
10 – 4I2– 2 (I2 + I3) – I1 = 0
that is, I1 + 6I2 + 2I3 =10
[3.61(b)]
For the closed loop BCDEB, we get
5 – 2 (I2 + I3) – 2 (I2 + I3 – I1) = 0
that is, 2I1 – 4I2 – 4I3 = –5
[3.61(c)]
Equations (3.61 a, b, c) are three simultaneous equations in three
unknowns. These can be solved by the usual method to give
I1 = 2.5A,   I2 = 5
8  A,   I3 = 7
18
  A
The currents in the various branches of the network are
AB : 5
8  A,   CA : 
1
2 2  A,   DEB : 
7
1 8   A
AD : 
7
18
 A,   CD : 0 A,   BC : 
1
2 2  A
It is easily verified that Kirchhoff’s second rule applied to the
remaining closed loops does not provide any additional independent
equation, that is, the above values of currents satisfy the second
rule for every closed loop of the network. For example, the total voltage
drop over the closed loop BADEB
5
5
8
4
15
8
4
V
V
V
+
×




−
×




equal to zero, as required by Kirchhoff’s second rule.
3.13  WHEATSTONE BRIDGE
As an application of Kirchhoff’s rules consider the circuit shown in
Fig. 3.18, which is called the Wheatstone bridge. The bridge has
four resistors R1, R2, R3 and R4. Across one pair of diagonally opposite
points (A and C in the figure) a source is connected. This (i.e., AC) is
called the battery arm. Between the other two vertices, B and D, a
galvanometer G (which is a device to detect currents) is connected. This
line, shown as BD in the figure, is called the galvanometer arm.
For simplicity, we assume that the cell has no internal resistance. In
general there will be currents flowing across all the resistors as well as a
current Ig through G. Of special interest, is the case of a balanced bridge
where the resistors are such that Ig = 0. We can easily get the balance
condition, such that there is no current through G. In this case, the
Kirchhoff’s junction rule applied to junctions D and B (see the figure)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 21 :
 Current
Electricity
101
FIGURE 3.18
 EXAMPLE 3.7
immediately gives us the relations I1 = I3 and I2 = I4. Next, we apply
Kirchhoff’s loop rule to closed loops ADBA and CBDC. The first
loop gives
–I1 R1 + 0 + I2 R2 = 0        (Ig = 0)  
(3.62)
and the second loop gives, upon using I3 = I1, I4 = I2
I2 R4 + 0 – I1 R3 = 0        
(3.63)
From Eq. (3.62), we obtain,
1
2
2
1
I
R
I
R
=
whereas from Eq. (3.63), we obtain,
1
4
2
3
I
R
I
R
=
Hence, we obtain the condition
2
4
1
3
R
R
R
R
=
[3.64(a)]
 This last equation relating the four resistors is called the balance
condition for the galvanometer to give zero or null deflection.
The Wheatstone bridge and its balance condition provide a practical
method for determination of an unknown resistance. Let us suppose we
have an unknown resistance, which we insert in the fourth arm; R4 is
thus not known. Keeping known resistances R1 and R2 in the first and
second arm of the bridge, we go on varying R3 till the galvanometer shows
a null deflection. The bridge then is balanced, and from the balance
condition the value of the unknown resistance R4 is given by,
2
4
3
1
R
R
R R
=
[3.64(b)]
A practical device using this principle is called the meter bridge.
Example 3.7 The four arms of a Wheatstone bridge (Fig. 3.19) have
the following resistances:
AB = 100W, BC = 10W, CD = 5W, and DA = 60W.
FIGURE 3.19
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 22 :
 Physics
102
 EXAMPLE 3.7
 A galvanometer of 15W resistance is connected across BD. Calculate
the current through the galvanometer when a potential difference of
10 V is maintained across AC.
Solution  Considering the mesh BADB, we have
100I1 + 15Ig – 60I2 = 0
or   20I1 + 3Ig – 12I2= 0
[3.65(a)]
Considering the mesh BCDB, we have
10 (I1 – Ig) – 15Ig – 5 (I2 + Ig) = 0
10I1 – 30Ig –5I2 = 0
2I1 – 6Ig – I2 = 0
[3.65(b)]
Considering the mesh ADCEA,
60I2 + 5 (I2 + Ig) = 10
65I2 + 5Ig = 10
13I2 + Ig = 2
[3.65(c)]
Multiplying Eq. (3.65b) by 10
20I1 – 60Ig – 10I2 = 0
[3.65(d)]
From Eqs. (3.65d) and (3.65a) we have
63Ig – 2I2 = 0
I2 = 31.5Ig
[3.65(e)]
Substituting the value of I2 into Eq. [3.65(c)], we get
13 (31.5Ig ) + Ig = 2
410.5 Ig = 2
Ig = 4.87 mA.
SUMMARY
1.
Current through a given area of a conductor is the net charge passing
per unit time through the area.
2.
To maintain a steady current, we must have a closed circuit in which
an external agency moves electric charge from lower to higher potential
energy. The work done per unit charge by the source in taking the
charge from lower to higher potential energy (i.e., from one terminal
of the source to the other) is called the electromotive force, or emf, of
the source. Note that the emf is not a force; it is the voltage difference
between the two terminals of a source in open circuit.
3.
Ohm’s law: The electric current I flowing through a substance is
proportional to the voltage V across its ends, i.e., V µ I or V = RI,
where R is called the resistance of the substance. The unit of resistance
is ohm: 1W = 1 V A–1.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 23 :
 Current
Electricity
103
4.
The resistance R of a conductor depends on its length l and
cross-sectional area A through the relation,
l
R
A
ρ
=
where r, called resistivity is a property of the material and depends on
temperature and pressure.
5.
Electrical resistivity of substances varies over a very wide range. Metals
have low resistivity, in the range of 10–8 W m to 10–6 W m. Insulators
like glass and rubber have 1022 to 1024 times greater resistivity.
Semiconductors like Si and Ge lie roughly in the middle range of
resistivity on a logarithmic scale.
6.
In most substances, the carriers of current are electrons; in some
cases, for example, ionic crystals and electrolytic liquids, positive and
negative ions carry the electric current.
7.
Current density j gives the amount of charge flowing per second per
unit area normal to the flow,
j = nq vd
where n is the number density (number per unit volume) of charge
carriers each of charge q, and vd is the drift velocity of the charge
carriers. For electrons q = – e. If j is normal to a cross-sectional area
A and is constant over the area, the magnitude of the current I through
the area is nevd A.
8.
Using E = V/l, I = nevd A, and Ohm’s law, one obtains
2
d
eE
ne v
m
m
ρ
=
The proportionality between the force eE on the electrons in a metal
due to the external field E and the drift velocity vd (not acceleration)
can be understood, if we assume that the electrons suffer collisions
with ions in the metal, which deflect them randomly. If such collisions
occur on an average at a time interval t,
vd = at = eEt/m
where a is the acceleration of the electron. This gives
2
m
ne
ρ
τ
=
9.
In the temperature range in which resistivity increases linearly with
temperature, the temperature coefficient of resistivity a is defined as
the fractional increase in resistivity per unit increase in temperature.
10. Ohm’s law is obeyed by many substances, but it is not a fundamental
law of nature. It fails if
(a) V depends on I non-linearly.
(b) the relation between V and I depends on the sign of V for the same
absolute value of V.
(c)
The relation between V and I is non-unique.
An example of (a) is when r increases with I (even if temperature is
kept fixed). A rectifier combines features (a) and (b). GaAs shows the
feature (c).
11. When a source of emf e is connected to an external resistance R, the
voltage Vext across R is given by
Vext = IR = 
R
R
r
ε
+
where r is the internal resistance of the source.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 24 :
 Physics
104
Physical Quantity
Symbol
Dimensions
Unit
Remark
Electric current
I
[A]
A
SI base unit
Charge
Q, q
[T A]
C
Voltage, Electric
V
[M L
2 T
–3 A
–1]
V
Work/charge
potential difference
Electromotive force
e
[M L
2 T
–3 A
–1]
V
Work/charge
Resistance
R
[M L
2 T
–3 A
–2]
W
R = V/I
Resistivity
r
[M L
3 T
–3 A
–2]
W m
R = rl/A
Electrical
s
[M
–1 L
–3 T
3 A
2]
S
s = 1/r
conductivity
Electric field
E
[M L T
–3 A
–1]
V m
–1
Electric force
charge
Drift speed
vd
[L T
–1]
m s
–1
vd
e E
m
=
τ
Relaxation time
t
[T]
s
Current density
j
[L
–2 A]
A m
–2
current/area
Mobility
m
[M L
3 T
–4 A
–1]
m
2 V
–1s
–1
/
d
v
E
12. Kirchhoff’s Rules –
(a) Junction Rule: At any junction of circuit elements, the sum of
currents entering the junction must equal the sum of currents
leaving it.
(b) Loop Rule: The algebraic sum of changes in potential around any
closed loop must be zero.
13. The Wheatstone bridge is an arrangement of four resistances – R1, R2,
R3, R4 as shown in the text. The null-point condition is given by
3
1
2
4
R
R
R
R
=
using which the value of one resistance can be determined, knowing
the other three resistances.
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
Current is a scalar although we represent current with an arrow.
Currents do not obey the  law of vector addition. That current is a
scalar also follows from it’s  definition. The current I through an area
of cross-section is given by the scalar product of two vectors:
I =  j . DS
where j and DS are vectors.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 25 :
 Current
Electricity
105
2.
Refer to V-I curves of a resistor and a diode as drawn in the text. A
resistor obeys Ohm’s law while a diode does not. The assertion that
V = IR is a statement of Ohm’s law is not true. This equation defines
resistance and it may be applied to all conducting devices whether
they obey Ohm’s law or not. The Ohm’s law asserts that the plot of I
versus V is linear i.e., R is independent of V.
Equation E = ρ j leads to another statement of Ohm’s law, i.e., a
conducting material obeys Ohm’s law when the resistivity of the
material does not depend on the magnitude and direction of applied
electric field.
3.
Homogeneous conductors like silver or semiconductors like pure
germanium or germanium containing impurities obey Ohm’s law within
some range of electric field values. If the field becomes too strong,
there are departures from Ohm’s law in all cases.
4.
Motion of conduction electrons in electric field E is the sum of (i)
motion due to random collisions and (ii) that due to E. The motion
due to random collisions averages to zero and does not contribute to
vd (Chapter 10, Textbook of Class XI). vd , thus is only due to applied
electric field on the electron.
5.
The relation j = ρ v should be applied to each type of charge carriers
separately. In a conducting wire, the total current and charge density
arises from both positive and negative charges:
j = ρ+ v+ + ρ– v–
ρρρρρ = ρ+ + ρ–
Now in a neutral wire carrying electric current,
ρρρρρ+ = – ρ–
Further, v+ ~ 0 which gives
ρρρρρ = 0
j = ρ– v
Thus, the relation j = ρ v does not apply to the total current charge
density.
6.
Kirchhoff’s junction rule is based on conservation of charge and the
outgoing currents add up and are equal to incoming current at a
junction. Bending or reorienting the wire does not change the validity
of Kirchhoff’s junction rule.
EXERCISES
3.1
The storage battery of a car has an emf of 12 V. If the internal
resistance of the battery is 0.4 Ω, what is the maximum current
that can be drawn from the battery?
3.2
A battery of emf 10 V and internal resistance 3 Ω is connected to a
resistor. If the current in the circuit is 0.5 A, what is the resistance
of the resistor? What is the terminal voltage of the battery when the
circuit is closed?
3.3
At room temperature (27.0 °C) the resistance of a heating element
is 100 Ω. What is the temperature of the element if the resistance is
found to be 117 Ω, given that the temperature coefficient of the
material of the resistor is 1.70 × 10–4 °C–1.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 26 :
 Physics
106
3.4
A negligibly small current is passed through a wire of length 15 m
and uniform cross-section 6.0 × 10–7 m2, and its resistance is
measured to be 5.0 W. What is the resistivity of the material at the
temperature of the experiment?
3.5
A silver wire has a resistance of 2.1 W at 27.5 °C, and a resistance
of 2.7 W at 100 °C. Determine the temperature coefficient of
resistivity of silver.
3.6
A heating element using nichrome connected to a 230 V supply
draws an initial current of 3.2 A which settles after a few seconds to
a steady value of 2.8 A. What is the steady temperature of the heating
element if the room temperature is 27.0 °C? Temperature coefficient
of resistance of nichrome averaged over the temperature range
involved is 1.70 × 10–4 °C–1.
3.7
Determine the current in each branch of the network shown in
Fig. 3.20:
FIGURE 3.20
3.8
A storage battery of emf 8.0 V and internal resistance 0.5 W is being
charged by a 120 V dc supply using a series resistor of 15.5 W. What
is the terminal voltage of the battery during charging? What is the
purpose of having a series resistor in the charging circuit?
3.9
The number density of  free electrons in a copper conductor
estimated in Example 3.1 is 8.5 × 1028 m–3. How long does an electron
take to drift from one end of a wire 3.0 m long to its other end? The
area of cross-section of the wire is 2.0 × 10–6 m2 and it is carrying a
current of 3.0 A.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 1 :
 4.1  INTRODUCTION
Both Electricity and Magnetism have been known for more than 2000
years. However, it was only about 200 years ago, in 1820, that it was
realised that they were intimately related. During a lecture demonstration
in the summer of 1820, Danish physicist Hans Christian Oersted noticed
that a current in a straight wire caused a noticeable deflection in a nearby
magnetic compass needle. He investigated this phenomenon. He found
that the alignment of the needle is tangential to an imaginary circle which
has the straight wire as its centre and has its plane perpendicular to the
wire. This situation is depicted in Fig.4.1(a). It is noticeable when the
current is large and the needle sufficiently close to the wire so that the
earth’s magnetic field may be ignored. Reversing the direction of the
current reverses the orientation of the needle [Fig. 4.1(b)]. The deflection
increases on increasing the current or bringing the needle closer to the
wire. Iron filings sprinkled around the wire arrange themselves in
concentric circles with the wire as the centre [Fig. 4.1(c)]. Oersted
concluded that moving charges or currents produced a magnetic field
in the surrounding space.
Following this, there was intense experimentation. In 1864, the laws
obeyed by electricity and magnetism were unified and formulated by
Chapter Four
MOVING CHARGES
AND MAGNETISM
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 2 :
 Physics
108
James Maxwell who then realised that light was electromagnetic waves.
Radio waves were discovered by Hertz, and produced by  J.C.Bose and
G. Marconi by the end of the 19th century. A  remarkable scientific and
technological progress took place in the 20th century. This was due to
our increased understanding of electromagnetism and the invention of
devices for production, amplification, transmission and detection of
electromagnetic waves.
In this chapter, we will see how magnetic field exerts
forces on moving charged particles, like electrons, protons,
and current-carrying wires. We shall also learn how
currents produce magnetic fields. We shall see how
particles can be accelerated to very high energies in a
cyclotron. We shall study how currents and voltages are
detected by a galvanometer.
In this and subsequent Chapter on magnetism,
we adopt the following convention: A current or a
field (electric or magnetic) emerging out of the plane of the
paper is depicted by a dot (¤). A current or a field going
into the plane of the paper is depicted by a cross ()*.
Figures. 4.1(a) and 4.1(b) correspond to these two
situations, respectively.
4.2  MAGNETIC FORCE
4.2.1  Sources and fields
Before we introduce the concept of a magnetic field B, we
shall recapitulate what we have learnt in Chapter 1 about
the electric field E. We have seen that the interaction
between two charges can be considered in two stages.
The charge Q, the source of the field, produces an electric
field E, where
FIGURE 4.1 The magnetic field due to a straight long current-carrying
wire. The wire is perpendicular to the plane of the paper. A ring of
compass needles surrounds the wire. The orientation of the needles is
shown when (a) the current emerges out of the plane of the paper,
(b) the current moves into the plane of the paper. (c) The arrangement of
iron filings around the wire. The darkened ends of the needle represent
north poles. The effect of the earth’s magnetic field is neglected.
*
A dot appears like the tip of an arrow pointed at you, a cross is like the feathered
tail of an arrow moving away from you.
Hans Christian Oersted
(1777–1851) 
Danish
physicist and chemist,
professor at Copenhagen.
He 
observed 
that 
a
compass needle suffers a
deflection when placed
near a wire carrying an
electric 
current. 
This
discovery gave the first
empirical evidence of a
connection between electric
and magnetic phenomena.
HANS CHRISTIAN OERSTED  (1777–1851)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 3 :
 109
Moving Charges and
Magnetism
E = Q ˆr / (4pe0)r2
(4.1)
where ˆr  is unit vector along r,  and  the field E is a vector
field. A charge q interacts with this field and experiences
a force F given by
F  =  q  E   = q Q ˆr   / (4pe0) r 2
(4.2)
As pointed out in the Chapter 1, the field E is not just
an artefact but has a physical role. It can  convey  energy
and momentum and is not established instantaneously
but takes finite time to propagate. The concept of a field
was specially stressed by Faraday  and was incorporated
by Maxwell in his unification of electricity and magnetism.
In addition to depending on each point in space, it can
also vary with time, i.e., be a function of time.  In our
discussions in this chapter, we will assume that the fields
do not change with time.
The field at a particular point can be due to one or
more charges. If there are more charges the fields add
vectorially. You have already learnt in Chapter 1 that this
is called the principle of superposition. Once the field is
known, the force on a test charge is given by Eq. (4.2).
Just as static charges produce an electric field, the
currents or moving charges produce (in addition) a
magnetic field, denoted by B (r), again a vector field. It
has several basic properties identical to the electric field.
It is defined at each point in space (and can in addition
depend on time). Experimentally, it is found to obey the
principle of superposition: the magnetic field of several
sources is the vector addition of magnetic field of each
individual source.
4.2.2  Magnetic Field,  Lorentz  Force
Let us suppose that there is  a point charge q (moving
with a velocity v and, located at r at a given time t) in
presence of both the electric field E (r) and the magnetic
field B (r).  The force on an electric charge q due to both
of them can be written as
F   = q [ E (r) +  v × B (r)] º Felectric +Fmagnetic
(4.3)
This force was given first  by H.A. Lorentz based on the extensive
experiments of Ampere and others. It is called the Lorentz force. You
have already studied in detail the force due to the electric field. If we
look at the interaction with the magnetic field, we find the following
features.
(i)
It depends on q, v and B (charge of the particle, the velocity and the
magnetic field). Force on a negative charge is opposite to that on a
positive charge.
(ii) The magnetic force q [ v × B ] includes a vector product of velocity
and magnetic field. The vector product makes the force due to magnetic
HENDRIK ANTOON LORENTZ (1853 – 1928)
Hendrik Antoon Lorentz
(1853 – 1928) Dutch
theoretical 
physicist,
professor at Leiden. He
investigated 
the
relationship 
between
electricity, magnetism, and
mechanics. In order to
explain the observed effect
of magnetic fields on
emitters of light (Zeeman
effect), he postulated the
existence of electric charges
in the atom, for which he
was awarded the Nobel Prize
in 1902. He derived a set of
transformation equations
(known 
after 
him, 
as
Lorentz 
transformation
equations) by some tangled
mathematical arguments,
but he was not aware that
these equations hinge on a
new concept of space and
time.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 4 :
 Physics
110
field vanish (become zero) if  velocity and magnetic field are parallel
or anti-parallel. The force acts in a (sideways) direction perpendicular
to both the velocity and the magnetic field. Its
direction  is given by the screw rule or right hand
rule  for vector (or cross) product as illustrated
in Fig. 4.2.
(iii)
The magnetic force is zero if  charge is not
moving (as then |v|= 0).  Only a moving
charge feels the magnetic force.
The expression for the magnetic force helps
us to define the unit of the magnetic field, if one
takes q, F and v, all to be unity in the force
equation F = q [ v × B] =q v B sin q ˆn ,  where q is
the angle between v and B [see  Fig. 4.2 (a)]. The
magnitude of magnetic field B is 1 SI unit, when
the force acting on a unit charge (1 C), moving
perpendicular to B with a speed 1m/s, is one
newton.
Dimensionally, we have [B] = [F/qv] and the unit
of B are Newton second / (coulomb metre).  This unit is called tesla (T)
named after Nikola Tesla (1856 – 1943). Tesla is a rather large unit. A
smaller  unit (non-SI) called gauss (=10–4 tesla) is also often used. The
earth’s magnetic field is about 3.6 × 10–5 T.
4.2.3  Magnetic force on a current-carrying conductor
We can extend the analysis for force due to magnetic field on a single
moving charge to a straight rod carrying current. Consider a rod of a
uniform cross-sectional area A and length l. We shall assume one kind
of mobile carriers as in a conductor (here electrons). Let the number
density of these mobile charge carriers in it be n. Then the total number
of mobile charge carriers in it is nlA. For a steady current I in this
conducting rod, we may assume that each mobile carrier has an average
drift velocity vd (see Chapter 3). In the presence of an external magnetic
field B, the force on these carriers is:
F = (nlA)q vd ´´´´´ B
where q is the value of the charge on  a carrier.  Now nq vd is the current
density j and |(nq vd)|A is the current I (see Chapter 3 for the discussion
of current and current density). Thus,
F = [(nq vd )lA] × B = [ jAl ] ´´´´´ B
   = Il ´´´´´ B
(4.4)
where l is a vector of magnitude l, the length of the rod, and with a direction
identical to the current I. Note that the current I is not a vector. In the last
step leading to Eq. (4.4), we have transferred the vector sign from  j to l.
Equation (4.4) holds for a straight rod. In this equation, B is the
external magnetic field. It is not the field produced by the current-carrying
rod. If the wire has an arbitrary shape we can calculate the Lorentz force
on it by considering it as a collection of linear strips dlj and summing
j
j
Id
×

F
B
l
This summation can be converted to an integral in most cases.
FIGURE 4.2 The direction of the magnetic
force acting on a charged particle. (a) The
force on a positively charged particle with
velocity v and making an angle q with the
magnetic field B is given by the right-hand
rule. (b) A moving charged particle q is
deflected in an opposite sense to –q in the
presence of magnetic field.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 5 :
 111
Moving Charges and
Magnetism
 EXAMPLE 4.1
Example 4.1 A straight wire of mass 200 g and length 1.5 m carries
a current of 2 A. It is suspended in mid-air by a uniform horizontal
magnetic field B (Fig. 4.3). What is the magnitude of the magnetic
field?
FIGURE 4.3
Solution  From Eq. (4.4), we find that there is an upward force F, of
magnitude IlB,. For mid-air suspension, this must be balanced by
the force due to gravity:
m g = I lB
  
m g
B
I l
=
     
0.2
9.8
0.65 T
2
1.5
×
=
=
×
Note that it would have been sufficient to specify m/l, the mass per
unit length of the wire. The earth’s magnetic field is approximately
4 × 10–5 T and we have ignored it.
Example 4.2 If the magnetic field is parallel to the positive y-axis
and the charged particle is moving along the positive x-axis (Fig. 4.4),
which way would the Lorentz force be for (a) an electron (negative
charge), (b) a proton (positive charge).
FIGURE 4.4
Solution   The velocity v of particle is along the x-axis, while B, the
magnetic field is along the y-axis, so v × B is along the z-axis (screw
rule or right-hand thumb rule). So, (a) for electron it will be along –z
axis. (b) for a positive charge (proton) the force is along +z axis.
 EXAMPLE 4.2
Charged particles moving in a magnetic field.
Interactive demonstration:
http://www.phys.hawaii.edu/~teb/optics/java/partmagn/index.html
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 6 :
 Physics
112
4.3  MOTION IN A MAGNETIC FIELD
We will now consider, in greater detail, the motion of a charge moving in
a  magnetic field.  We have learnt  in Mechanics (see Class XI book, Chapter
5) that a force on a particle does work if  the force has a component along
(or opposed to) the direction of motion of the particle. In the case of motion
of a charge in a magnetic field, the magnetic force is perpendicular to the
velocity of the particle. So no work is done and no change in the magnitude
of the velocity is produced (though the direction of momentum may be
changed). [Notice that this is unlike the force due to an electric field, qE,
which can have a component parallel (or antiparallel) to motion and thus
can transfer energy in addition to momentum.]
We shall consider motion of a charged particle in a uniform magnetic
field. First consider the case of v perpendicular to B.  The
perpendicular force, q v × B, acts as a centripetal force and
produces a circular motion perpendicular to the magnetic field.
The particle will describe a circle if v and B are  perpendicular
to each other (Fig. 4.5).
If velocity has a component along B, this component
remains unchanged as the motion along the magnetic field will
not be affected by the magnetic field. The motion in a plane
perpendicular to B is as before a circular one, thereby producing
a helical motion (Fig. 4.6).
You have already learnt in earlier classes (See Class XI,
Chapter 3) that if r is the radius of the circular path of a particle,
then a force of  m v2 / r, acts perpendicular to the path towards
the centre of the circle, and is called the  centripetal force. If the
velocity v is perpendicular to the magnetic field   B, the  magnetic
force is  perpendicular to both v and B and acts
like a centripetal force. It has a magnitude q v
B. Equating the two expressions for centripetal
force,
m v 2/r = q v B, which gives
r =  m v / qB
(4.5)
for the radius of the circle described by the
charged particle. The larger the  momentum,  the
larger is the radius and bigger the circle
described. If ω is the angular frequency, then   v
= ω  r. So,
ω  = 2π ν =  q B/ m
[4.6(a)]
which is independent of the velocity or energy .
Here ν is the frequency of rotation. The
independence of ν from energy has important
application in the design of a cyclotron (see
Section 4.4.2).
The time taken for one revolution is T= 2π/ω
≡ 1/ν. If there is a  component of the velocity
parallel to the magnetic field (denoted by v||), it will make the particle
FIGURE 4.5 Circular motion
FIGURE 4.6 Helical motion
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 7 :
 113
Moving Charges and
Magnetism
 EXAMPLE 4.3
Example  4.3   What is the radius of the path of an electron (mass
9 × 10-31 kg and charge 1.6 × 10–19 C) moving at a speed of 3 ×107 m/s in
a magnetic field of 6 × 10–4 T perpendicular to it?  What is its
frequency?  Calculate its energy in  keV. ( 1 eV = 1.6 × 10–19 J).
Solution Using Eq. (4.5) we find
r  = m v / (qB)  = 9 ×10–31 kg × 3 × 107  m s–1 / ( 1.6 × 10–19 C × 6 × 10–4 T)
                      = 28 × 10–2 m = 28 cm
ν = v / (2 πr) = 17×106 s–1   = 17×106  Hz   =17 MHz.
E = (½ )mv 2   = (½ ) 9 × 10–31 kg × 9 × 1014 m2/s2  = 40.5 ×10–17 J
  ≈ 4×10–16 J = 2.5 keV.
move along the field and the path of the particle would be a helical one
(Fig. 4.6). The distance moved along the magnetic field  in one rotation is
called pitch p.  Using Eq. [4.6 (a)], we have
p =   v||T  =  2πm v|| / q B
[4.6(b)]
The radius of the circular component of motion is called the radius of
the helix.
4.4
MAGNETIC FIELD DUE TO A CURRENT
ELEMENT, BIOT-SAVART LAW
All magnetic fields that we know are due to currents (or moving
charges) and due to intrinsic magnetic moments of particles.
Here, we shall study the relation between current and the
magnetic field it produces. It is given by the Biot-Savart’s  law.
Fig. 4.7 shows a finite conductor XY carrying current I. Consider
an infinitesimal element dl of the conductor. The magnetic field
dB due to this element is to be determined at a point P which is at
a distance r from it. Let θ be the angle between dl and the
displacement vector r. According to Biot-Savart’s law, the
magnitude of the magnetic field dB is proportional to the current
I, the element length |dl|, and inversely proportional to the square
of the distance r. Its direction* is perpendicular to the plane
containing dl and r . Thus, in vector notation,
d
I d
r
B
r
∝
×
l
3
           =
×
µ0
3
4π
I d
r
l
r
 [4.7(a)]
where µ0/4π is a constant of proportionality. The above expression
holds when the medium is vacuum.
FIGURE 4.7 Illustration of
the Biot-Savart law. The
current element I dl
produces a field dB at a
distance r. The ⊗ sign
indicates that the
field is perpendicular
to the plane of this
page and directed
into it.
*
The sense of  dl × r is also given by the Right Hand Screw rule : Look at the
plane containing vectors dl and r. Imagine moving from the first vector towards
second vector. If the movement is anticlockwise, the resultant is towards you.
If it is clockwise, the resultant is away from you.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 8 :
 Physics
114
 EXAMPLE 4.4
The magnitude of this field is,
µ
θ
=
π
0
2
d sin
d
4
I
l
r
B
[4.7(b)]
where we have used the property of cross-product. Equation [4.7 (a)]
constitutes our basic equation for the magnetic field.  The proportionality
constant in SI units has the exact value,
7
0
10
Tm/A
4
µ
−
=
π
[4.7(c)]
We call µ0 the permeability of free space (or vacuum).
The Biot-Savart law for the magnetic field has certain similarities, as
well as, differences with the Coulomb’s law for the electrostatic field. Some
of these are:
(i)
Both are long range, since both depend inversely on the square of
distance from the source to the point of interest. The principle of
superposition applies to both fields. [In this connection, note that
the magnetic field is linear in the source I dl just as the electrostatic
field is linear in its source: the electric charge.]
(ii) The electrostatic field is produced by a scalar source, namely, the electric
charge. The magnetic field is produced by a vector source I dl.
(iii) The electrostatic field is along the displacement vector joining the
source and the field point. The magnetic field is perpendicular to the
plane containing the displacement vector r and the current element I dl.
(iv) There is an angle dependence in the Biot-Savart law which is not
present  in the electrostatic case. In Fig. 4.7, the magnetic field at any
point in  the direction of dl (the dashed line) is zero. Along this line,
θ = 0, sin θ = 0 and from Eq. [4.7(a)], |dB| = 0.
There is an interesting  relation between ε0, the permittivity of free
space; µ0, the permeability of free space; and c, the speed of light in vacuum:
(
)
0
0
0
0
4
4
µ
ε µ
ε
 
 
=
π
 
 
 
 
π
 
(
)
7
9
1
10
9
10
−
 
 
=  
 
 
 
×
8 2
2
1
1
(3
10 )
c
=
=
×
We will discuss this connection further in Chapter 8 on the
electromagnetic waves. Since the speed of light in vacuum is constant,
the product µ0ε0 is fixed in magnitude. Choosing the value of either ε0 or
µ0, fixes the value of the other. In SI units, µ0 is fixed to be equal to
4π × 10–7
 in magnitude.
Example 4.4 An element 
ˆ
∆= ∆x i
l
 is placed at the origin and carries
a large current I = 10 A (Fig. 4.8). What is the magnetic field on the y-
axis at a distance of 0.5 m. ∆x = 1 cm.
FIGURE 4.8
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 9 :
 115
Moving Charges and
Magnetism
Solution
 
0
2
d sin
|d
|
4
I
l
r
µ
θ
=
π
B
 [using Eq. (4.7)]
2
d
10
m
l
x
−
= ∆
=
, I = 10 A,  r = 0.5 m = y, 
7
0
T m
/4
10
A
µ
−
π =
θ = 90° ; sin θ = 1
7
2
2
10
10
10
d
25
10
−
−
−
×
×
=
×
B
= 4 × 10–8 T
The direction of the field is in the +z-direction. This is so since,
ˆ
ˆ
d
= ∆
×
i ×
j
x
y
r
l
(
)
ˆ
ˆ
y
x
=
∆
i × j
ˆ
y
x
=
∆k
We remind you of the following cyclic property of cross-products,
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
ˆ
;
;
×
=
×
=
×
=
i
j
k
j
k
i k
i
j
Note that the field is small in magnitude.
In the next section, we shall use the Biot-Savart law to calculate the
magnetic field due to a circular loop.
4.5 MAGNETIC FIELD ON THE AXIS OF A CIRCULAR
CURRENT LOOP
In this section, we shall evaluate the magnetic field  due
to a circular coil along its axis. The evaluation entails
summing up the effect of infinitesimal current elements
(I dl) mentioned in the previous section. We assume that
the current I is steady and that the evaluation is carried
out in free space (i.e., vacuum).
Fig. 4.9 depicts a circular loop carrying a steady
current I. The loop is placed in the 
 plane with its
centre at the origin O and has a radius R. The x-axis is
the axis of the loop. We wish to calculate the magnetic
field at the point P on this axis. Let x be the distance of P
from the centre O of the loop.
Consider a conducting element dl of the loop. This is
shown in Fig. 4.9. The magnitude dB of the magnetic
field due to dl is given by the Biot-Savart law [Eq. 4.7(a)],
0
3
4
=
× r
I d
dB
r
µ
π
l
(4.8)
Now r2 = x2 + R2 . Further, any element of the loop
will be perpendicular to the displacement vector from
the element to the axial point. For example, the element dl in Fig. 4.9 is
in the 
 plane, whereas, the displacement vector r from dl to the axial
point P is in the 
 plane. Hence |dl × r|=r dl. Thus,
 
(
)
π
0
2
2
d
d
4
I l
B
x
R
µ
=
+
(4.9)
FIGURE 4.9 Magnetic field on the
axis of a current carrying circular
loop of radius R. Shown are the
magnetic field dB (due to a line
element dl ) and its
components along and
perpendicular to the axis.
 EXAMPLE 4.4
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 10 :
 Physics
116
The direction of dB is shown in Fig. 4.9. It is perpendicular to the
plane formed by dl and r. It has an x-component dBx and a component
perpendicular to x-axis, dB⊥. When the components perpendicular to
the x-axis are summed over, they cancel out and we obtain a null result.
For example, the dB⊥ component due to dl is cancelled by the
contribution due to the diametrically opposite dl element, shown in
Fig. 4.9. Thus, only the x-component survives. The net contribution along
x-direction can be obtained by integrating dBx  = dB cos θ over the loop.
For Fig. 4.9,
2
2 1/2
cos
(
)
R
x
R
θ =
+
 (4.10)
From Eqs. (4.9) and (4.10),
(
)
π
0
3/2
2
2
d
d
4
x
I l
R
B
x
R
µ
=
+
The summation of elements dl over the loop yields 2πR, the
circumference of the loop. Thus, the magnetic field at P due to entire
circular loop is
(
)
2
0
3/2
2
2
ˆ
ˆ
2
x
I R
B
x
R
µ
=
=
+
B
i
i
(4.11)
As a special case of the above result, we may obtain the field at the centre
of the loop. Here  x = 0, and we obtain,
0
0
ˆ
2
I
R
µ
=
B
i
(4.12)
The magnetic field lines due to a circular wire form closed loops and
are shown in Fig. 4.10. The direction of the magnetic field is given by
(another) right-hand thumb rule stated below:
Curl the palm of your right hand around the circular wire with the
fingers pointing in the direction of the current. The right-hand thumb
gives the direction of the magnetic field.
FIGURE 4.10 The magnetic field lines for a current loop. The direction of
the field is given by the right-hand thumb rule described in the text. The
upper side of the loop may be thought of as the north pole and the lower
side as the south pole of a magnet.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 11 :
 117
Moving Charges and
Magnetism
 EXAMPLE 4.5
Example 4.5 A straight wire carrying a current of 12 A is bent into a
semi-circular arc of radius 2.0 cm as shown in Fig. 4.11(a). Consider
the magnetic field B at the centre of the arc. (a) What is the magnetic
field due to the straight segments? (b) In what way the contribution
to B from the semicircle differs from that of a circular loop and in
what way does it resemble? (c) Would your answer be different if the
wire were bent into a semi-circular arc of the same radius but in the
opposite way as shown in Fig. 4.11(b)?
FIGURE 4.11
Solution
(a) dl and r for each element of the straight segments are parallel.
Therefore, dl × r = 0. Straight segments do not contribute to
|B|.
(b) For all segments of the semicircular arc, dl × r are all parallel to
each other (into the plane of the paper). All such contributions
add up in magnitude. Hence direction of B for a semicircular arc
is given by the right-hand rule and magnitude is half that of a
circular loop. Thus B is 1.9 × 10–4 T normal to the plane of the
paper going into it.
(c) Same magnitude of B but opposite in direction to that in (b).
Example 4.6 Consider a tightly wound 100 turn coil of radius 10
cm, carrying a current of 1 A. What is the magnitude of the magnetic
field at the centre of the coil?
Solution Since the coil is tightly wound, we may take each circular
element to have the same radius R = 10 cm = 0.1 m. The number of
turns N = 100. The magnitude of the magnetic field is,
–7
2
0
–1
4
10
10
1
2
2
10
NI
B
R
µ
π ×
×
×
=
=
×
4
2
10−
=
π ×
4
6 28
10
T
.
−
=
×
4.6  AMPERE’S CIRCUITAL LAW
There is an alternative and appealing way in which the
Biot-Savart law may be expressed. Ampere’s circuital law
considers an open surface with a boundary (Fig. 4.12).
The surface has current passing through it. We consider
the boundary to be made up of a number of small line
elements. Consider one such element of length dl. We
take the value of the tangential component of the
magnetic field, Bt, at this element and multiply it by the
FIGURE 4.12
 EXAMPLE 4.6
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 12 :
 Physics
118
length of that element dl [Note: Btdl=B.dl]. All such
products are added together. We consider the limit as the
lengths of elements get smaller and their number gets
larger. The sum then tends to an integral. Ampere’s   law
states that this integral is  equal to µ0 times the total
current passing through  the surface,  i.e.,
“B.dl = µ0I
[4.13(a)]
where I  is the total current through the surface. The
integral is taken over the closed loop coinciding with the
boundary C of the surface. The relation above involves a
sign-convention, given by the right-hand rule. Let the
fingers of the right-hand be curled in the sense the
boundary is traversed in the loop integral “B.dl. Then
the direction of the thumb gives the sense in which the
current I  is regarded as positive.
For several applications, a much simplified version of
Eq. [4.13(a)] proves sufficient. We shall assume that, in
such cases, it is possible to choose the loop (called
an amperian loop) such that at each point of the
loop, either
(i)
B is tangential to the loop and is a non-zero constant
B, or
(ii)
B is normal to the loop, or
(iii) B vanishes.
Now, let L be the length (part) of the  loop for which B
is tangential. Let Ie  be the current enclosed by the loop.
Then, Eq. (4.13) reduces to,
BL =µ0Ie
[4.13(b)]
When there is a system with a symmetry such as for
a straight infinite current-carrying wire in Fig. 4.13, the
Ampere’s law enables an easy evaluation of the magnetic
field, much the same way Gauss’ law helps in
determination of the electric field. This is exhibited in the
Example 4.8 below. The boundary of the loop chosen is
a circle and magnetic field is tangential to the
circumference of the circle. The law gives, for the left hand
side of Eq. [4.13 (b)], B. 2πr. We find that the magnetic
field at a distance r outside the wire is tangential and
given by
B × 2πr  =  µ0 I,
B = µ0  I/ (2πr)
(4.14)
The above result for the infinite wire  is interesting
from several points of view.
ANDRE AMPERE (1775 –1836)
Andre Ampere (1775 –
1836) Andre Marie Ampere
was a French physicist,
mathematician and chemist
who founded the science of
electrodynamics. Ampere
was 
a 
child 
prodigy
who mastered advanced
mathematics by the age of
12. Ampere grasped the
significance of Oersted’s
discovery. He carried out a
large series of experiments
to explore the relationship
between current electricity
and magnetism. These
investigations culminated
in 
1827 
with 
the
publication 
of 
the
‘Mathematical Theory of
Electrodynamic Pheno-
mena Deduced Solely from
Experiments’. He hypo-
thesised that all magnetic
phenomena are due to
circulating 
electric
currents. Ampere was
humble 
and 
absent-
minded. He once forgot an
invitation to dine with the
Emperor Napoleon. He died
of pneumonia at the age of
61. His gravestone bears
the epitaph: Tandem Felix
(Happy at last).
(i)
It implies that the field at every point on a circle of
radius r, (with the wire along the axis), is same in
magnitude. In other words, the magnetic field
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 13 :
 119
Moving Charges and
Magnetism
 EXAMPLE 4.7
possesses what is called a cylindrical symmetry. The field that
normally can depend on three coordinates depends only on one: r.
Whenever there is symmetry, the solutions simplify.
(ii)
The field direction at any point on this circle is tangential to it.
Thus, the lines of constant magnitude of magnetic field form
concentric circles. Notice now, in Fig. 4.1(c), the iron filings form
concentric circles. These lines called magnetic field lines form closed
loops. This is unlike the electrostatic field lines which originate
from positive charges and end at negative charges. The expression
for the magnetic field of a straight wire provides a theoretical
justification to Oersted’s experiments.
(iii)
Another interesting point to note is that even though the wire is
infinite, the field due to it at a non-zero distance is not infinite. It
tends to blow up only when we come very close to the wire. The
field is directly proportional to the current and inversely
proportional to the distance from the (infinitely long) current source.
(iv)
There exists a simple rule to determine the direction of the magnetic
field due to a long wire. This rule, called the right-hand rule*, is:
Grasp the wire in your right hand with your extended thumb pointing
in the direction of the current. Your fingers will curl around in the
direction of the magnetic field.
Ampere’s circuital law is not new in content from Biot-Savart law.
Both relate the magnetic field and the current, and both express the same
physical consequences of a steady electrical current. Ampere’s law is to
Biot-Savart law, what Gauss’s law is to Coulomb’s law. Both, Ampere’s
and Gauss’s law relate a physical quantity on the periphery or boundary
(magnetic or electric field) to another physical quantity, namely, the source,
in the interior (current or charge). We also note that Ampere’s circuital
law holds for steady currents which do not fluctuate with time. The
following example will help us understand what is meant by the term
enclosed current.
Example 4.7 Figure 4.13 shows a long straight wire of a circular
cross-section (radius a) carrying steady current I. The current I is
uniformly distributed across this cross-section. Calculate the
magnetic field in the region r < a and r > a.
FIGURE 4.13
*
Note that there are two distinct right-hand rules: One which gives the direction
of B on the axis of current-loop and the other which gives direction of B
for a straight conducting wire. Fingers and thumb play different roles in
the two.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 14 :
 Physics
120
 EXAMPLE 4.7
Solution (a) Consider the case r > a. The Amperian loop, labelled 2,
is a circle concentric with the cross-section. For this loop,
L  = 2 π r
Ie = Current enclosed by the loop = I
The result is the familiar expression for a long straight wire
B (2π r) = µ0I
π 
0
2
I
B
r
µ
=
[4.15(a)]
1
B
r
∝
(r > a)
Now the current enclosed Ie is not I, but is less than this value.
Since the current distribution is uniform, the current enclosed is,
I
I
r
a
e =




π
π
2
2
 
2
2
Ir
a
=
Using Ampere’s law, 
π
2
0
2
(2
)
I r
B
r
a
µ
=
B
I
a
r
= 



µ0
2
2π
[4.15(b)]
B ∝ r      (r < a)
FIGURE 4.14
Figure (4.14) shows a plot of the magnitude of B with distance r
from the centre of the wire. The direction of the field is tangential to
the respective circular loop (1 or 2) and given by the right-hand
rule described earlier in this section.
This example possesses the required symmetry so that Ampere’s
law can be applied readily.
It should be noted that while Ampere’s circuital law holds for any
loop, it may not always facilitate an evaluation of the magnetic field in
every case. For example, for the case of the circular loop discussed in
Section 4.5, it cannot be applied to extract the simple expression
B = µ0I/2R [Eq. (4.12)] for the field at the centre of the loop. However,
there exists a large number of situations of high symmetry where the law
can be conveniently applied. We shall use  it in the next section to calculate
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 15 :
 121
Moving Charges and
Magnetism
the magnetic field produced by two commonly used and very useful
magnetic systems: the solenoid and the toroid.
4.7  THE SOLENOID
We shall discuss a long solenoid. By long solenoid we mean that the
solenoid’s length is large compared to its radius. It consists of a long wire
wound in the form of a helix where the neighbouring turns are closely
spaced. So each turn can be regarded as a circular loop.  The net magnetic
field is the vector sum of the fields due to all the turns. Enamelled wires
are used for winding so that turns are insulated from each other.
Figure 4.15 displays the magnetic field lines for a finite solenoid. We
show a section of this solenoid in an enlarged manner in Fig. 4.15(a).
Figure 4.15(b) shows the entire finite solenoid with its magnetic field. In
Fig. 4.15(a), it is clear from the circular loops that the field  between two
neighbouring turns vanishes. In Fig. 4.15(b), we see that the field at the
interior mid-point P is uniform, strong and along the axis of the solenoid.
The field at the exterior mid-point Q is weak and moreover is along the
axis of the solenoid with no perpendicular or normal component. As the
FIGURE 4.15 (a) The magnetic field due to a section of the solenoid which has been
stretched out for clarity. Only the exterior semi-circular part is shown. Notice
how the circular loops between neighbouring turns tend to cancel.
(b) The magnetic field of a finite solenoid.
FIGURE 4.16 The magnetic field of a very long solenoid. We consider a
rectangular Amperian loop abcd to determine the field.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 16 :
 Physics
122
 EXAMPLE 4.8
solenoid is made longer it appears like a long cylindrical metal sheet.
Figure 4.16 represents this idealised picture. The field outside the solenoid
approaches zero. We shall assume that the field outside is zero. The field
inside becomes everywhere parallel to the axis.
Consider a rectangular Amperian loop abcd. Along cd the field is zero
as argued above. Along transverse sections bc and ad, the field component
is zero. Thus, these two sections  make no contribution. Let the field along
ab be B. Thus, the relevant length of the Amperian loop is, L = h.
Let n be the number of turns per unit length, then the total number
of turns is  nh. The enclosed current is,  Ie = I (n h), where I is the current
in the solenoid. From Ampere’s circuital law [Eq. 4.13 (b)]
BL =  µ0Ie,    B h = µ0I (n h)
B = µ0 n I
(4.16)
The direction of the field is given by the right-hand rule. The solenoid
is commonly used to obtain a uniform magnetic field. We shall see in the
next chapter that a large field is possible by inserting a soft iron core
inside the solenoid.
Example 4.8 A solenoid of length 0.5 m has a radius of 1 cm and is
made up of 500 turns. It carries a current of 5 A. What is the
magnitude of the magnetic field inside the solenoid?
Solution  The number of turns per unit length is,
500
1000
0.5
n =
=
 turns/m
The length l = 0.5 m and radius r = 0.01 m. Thus, l/a = 50 i.e., l >> a.
Hence, we can use the long solenoid formula, namely, Eq. (4.20)
B = µ0n I
   = 4π × 10–7 × 103 × 5
   = 6.28 × 10–3 T
FIGURE 4.17 Two long straight
parallel conductors carrying steady
currents Ia and Ib and separated by a
distance d. Ba is the magnetic field
set up by conductor ‘a’ at conductor ‘b’.
4.8 FORCE BETWEEN TWO PARALLEL
CURRENTS, THE AMPERE
We have learnt that there exists a magnetic field due to a
conductor carrying a current which obeys the Biot-Savart
law. Further, we have learnt that an external magnetic field
will exert a force on a current-carrying conductor. This
follows from the Lorentz force formula. Thus, it is logical
to expect that two current-carrying conductors placed near
each other will exert (magnetic) forces on each other. In
the period 1820-25, Ampere studied the nature of this
magnetic force and its dependence on the magnitude of
the current, on the shape and size of the conductors, as
well as, the distances between the conductors. In this
section, we shall take the simple example of two parallel
current- carrying conductors, which will perhaps help us
to appreciate Ampere’s painstaking work.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 17 :
 123
Moving Charges and
Magnetism
Figure 4.17 shows two long parallel conductors a and b separated
by a distance d and carrying (parallel) currents Ia and Ib, respectively.
The conductor ‘a’ produces,  the same magnetic field Ba at all points
along the conductor ‘b’. The right-hand rule tells us that the direction of
this field is downwards (when the conductors are placed horizontally).
Its magnitude is given by Eq. [4.15(a)] or from Ampere’s circuital law,
0
2
a
a
I
B
d
µ
=
π
The conductor ‘b’ carrying a current Ib will experience a sideways
force due to the  field Ba. The direction of this force is towards the
conductor ‘a’ (Verify this). We label this force as Fba, the force on a
segment L of ‘b’ due to ‘a’. The magnitude of this force is given by
Eq. (4.4),
=
ba
b
a
F
I LB
      
µ
π
=
0
2
a
b
I I L
d
(4.17)
It is of course possible to compute the force on ‘a’ due to ‘b’. From
considerations similar to above we can find the force Fab, on a segment of
length L of ‘a’ due to the current in ‘b’. It  is equal in magnitude to Fba,
and directed towards ‘b’. Thus,
Fba = –Fab
(4.18)
Note that this is consistent with Newton’s third Law. Thus, at least for
parallel conductors and steady currents, we have shown that the
Biot-Savart law and the Lorentz force yield results in accordance with
Newton’s third Law*.
We have seen from above that currents flowing in the same direction
attract each other. One can show that oppositely directed currents repel
each other. Thus,
Parallel currents attract, and antiparallel currents repel.
This rule is the opposite of what we find in electrostatics. Like (same
sign) charges repel each other, but like (parallel) currents attract each other.
Let fba represent the magnitude of the force Fba per unit length. Then,
from Eq. (4.17),
π
0
2
a
b
ba
I I
f
d
µ
=
(4.19)
The above expression is used to define the ampere (A), which is one of
the seven SI base units.
*
It turns out that when we have time-dependent currents and/or charges in
motion, Newton’s third law may not hold for forces between charges and/or
conductors. An essential consequence of the Newton’s third law in mechanics
is conservation of momentum of an isolated system. This, however, holds even
for the case of time-dependent situations with electromagnetic fields, provided
the momentum carried by fields is also taken into account.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 18 :
 Physics
124
 EXAMPLE 4.9
The ampere is the value of that steady current which, when maintained
in each of the two very long, straight, parallel conductors of negligible
cross-section, and placed one metre apart in vacuum, would produce
on  each of these conductors a force equal to  2 × 10–7 newtons per metre
of length.
This definition of the ampere was adopted in 1946. It is a theoretical
definition. In practice, one must eliminate the effect of the earth’s magnetic
field and substitute very long wires by multiturn coils of appropriate
geometries. An instrument called the current balance is used to measure
this mechanical force.
The SI unit of charge, namely, the coulomb, can now be defined in
terms of the ampere.
When a steady current of 1A is set up in a conductor, the quantity of
charge that flows through its cross-section in 1s is one coulomb (1C).
Example 4.9 The horizontal component of the earth’s magnetic field
at a certain place is 3.0 ×10–5 T and the direction of the field is from
the geographic south to the geographic north. A very long straight
conductor is carrying a steady current of 1A. What is the force per
unit length on it when it is placed on a horizontal table and the
direction of the current is (a) east to west; (b) south to north?
Solution  F = Il × B
F = IlB sinθ
The force per unit length is
f = F/l = I B sinθ
(a) When the current is flowing from east to west,
θ = 90°
Hence,
f = I B
  = 1 × 3 × 10–5 = 3 × 10–5 N m–1
This is larger than the value 2×10–7 Nm–1 quoted in the definition
of the ampere. Hence it is important to eliminate the effect of the
earth’s magnetic field and other stray fields while standardising
the ampere.
The direction of the force is downwards. This direction may be
obtained by the directional property of cross product of vectors.
(b) When the current is flowing from south to north,
θ = 0o
f = 0
Hence there is no force on the conductor.
4.9  TORQUE ON CURRENT LOOP, MAGNETIC DIPOLE
4.9.1
Torque on a rectangular current loop in a uniform
magnetic field
We now show that a rectangular loop carrying a steady current I and
placed in a uniform magnetic field experiences a torque. It does not
experience a net force. This behaviour is analogous to that of electric
dipole in a uniform electric field (Section 1.11).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 19 :
 125
Moving Charges and
Magnetism
We first consider the simple case when the
rectangular loop is placed such that the uniform
magnetic field B is in the plane of the loop. This is
illustrated in Fig. 4.18(a).
The field exerts no force on the two arms AD and BC
of the loop. It is perpendicular to the arm AB of the loop
and exerts a force F1 on it which is directed into the
plane of the loop. Its magnitude is,
F1 = I b B
Similarly, it exerts a force F2 on the arm CD and F2
is directed out of the plane of the paper.
F2 = I b B = F1
Thus, the net force on the loop is zero. There is a
torque on the loop due to the pair of forces F1 and F2.
Figure 4.18(b) shows a view of the loop from the AD
end. It shows that the torque on the loop tends to rotate
it anticlockwise. This torque is (in magnitude),
1
2
2
2
a
a
F
F
τ =
+
(
)
2
2
a
a
IbB
IbB
I ab B
=
+
=
    = I A B
(4.20)
where A = ab is the area of the rectangle.
We next consider the case when the plane of the loop,
is not along the magnetic field, but makes an angle with
it. We take the angle between the field and the normal to
the coil to be angle θ (The previous case corresponds to
θ = π/2). Figure 4.19 illustrates this general case.
The forces on the arms BC and DA are equal, opposite, and act along
the axis of the coil, which connects the centres of mass of BC and DA.
Being collinear along the axis they cancel each other, resulting in no net
force or torque. The forces on arms AB and CD are F1 and F2. They too
are equal and opposite, with magnitude,
F1 = F2 = I b B
But they are not collinear!  This results in a couple as before. The
torque is, however, less than the earlier case when plane of loop was
along the magnetic field. This is because the perpendicular distance
between the forces of the couple has decreased. Figure 4.19(b) is a view
of the arrangement from the AD end and it illustrates these two forces
constituting a couple. The magnitude of the torque on the loop is,
1
2
sin
sin
2
2
a
a
F
F
τ
θ
θ
=
+
= I ab B sin θ
   = I A B sin θ
(4.21)
FIGURE 4.18 (a) A rectangular
current-carrying coil in uniform
magnetic field. The magnetic moment
m points downwards. The torque τττττ is
along the axis and tends to rotate the
coil anticlockwise. (b) The couple
acting on the coil.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 20 :
 Physics
126
 EXAMPLE 4.10
As θ à 0, the perpendicular distance between
the forces of the couple also approaches zero. This
makes the forces collinear and the net force and
torque zero. The torques in Eqs. (4.20) and (4.21)
can be expressed as vector product of the magnetic
moment of the coil and the magnetic field.
We define the magnetic moment of the current
loop as,
m = I A
(4.22)
where the direction of the area vector A is given
by the right-hand thumb rule and is directed into
the plane of the paper in Fig. 4.18. Then as the
angle between m and B is θ ,  Eqs. (4.20) and (4.21)
can be expressed by one expression
(4.23)
This  is analogous to the electrostatic case
(Electric dipole of dipole moment pe in an electric
field E).
τ = p
E
×
e
As is clear from Eq. (4.22), the dimensions of the
magnetic moment are [A][L2] and its unit is Am2.
From Eq. (4.23), we see that the torque τττττ
vanishes when m is either parallel or antiparallel
to the magnetic field B. This indicates a state of
equilibrium as there is no torque on the coil (this
also applies to any object with a magnetic moment
m). When m and B are parallel the equilibrium is
a stable one. Any small rotation of the coil
produces a torque which brings it back to its original position. When
they are antiparallel, the equilibrium is unstable as any rotation produces
a torque which increases with the amount of rotation. The presence of
this torque is also the reason why a small magnet or any magnetic dipole
aligns itself with the external magnetic field.
If the loop has N closely wound turns, the expression for torque, Eq.
(4.23), still holds, with
m = N I A
(4.24)
Example 4.10 A 100 turn closely wound circular coil of radius 10
cm carries a current of 3.2 A. (a) What is the field at the centre of the
coil? (b) What is the magnetic moment of this coil?
The coil is placed in a vertical plane and is free to rotate about a
horizontal axis which coincides with its diameter. A uniform magnetic
field of 2T in the horizontal direction exists such that initially the axis
of the coil is in the direction of the field. The coil rotates through an
angle of 90° under the influence of the magnetic field. (c) What are the
magnitudes of the torques on the coil in the initial and final position?
(d) What is the angular speed acquired by the coil when it has rotated
by 90°? The moment of inertia of the coil is 0.1 kg m2.
FIGURE 4.19 (a) The area vector of the loop
ABCD makes an arbitrary angle θ with
the magnetic field. (b) Top view of
the loop. The forces F1 and F2 acting
on the arms AB and CD
are indicated.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 21 :
 127
Moving Charges and
Magnetism
EXAMPLE 4.11
EXAMPLE 4.10
Solution
(a) From Eq. (4.12)
0
2
NI
B
R
µ
=
Here, N = 100; I = 3.2 A, and R = 0.1 m. Hence,
 =
×
×
×
−
−
4
10
10
2
10
5
1
     (using π × 3.2 = 10)
    = 2 × 10–3 T
The direction is given by the right-hand thumb rule.
(b) The magnetic moment is given by Eq. (4.24),
m = N I A = N I π r2 = 100 × 3.2 × 3.14 × 10–2 = 10 A m2
The direction is once again given by the right-hand thumb rule.
(c) τ = m × B    [from Eq. (4.23)]
   = m B sin θ
Initially, θ = 0. Thus, initial torque τi = 0. Finally, θ = π/2 (or 90º).
Thus, final torque τf = m B = 10 × 2 = 20 N m.
(d)  From Newton’s second law,
I  
where I  is the moment of inertia of the coil. From chain rule,
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
=
=
t
t
ω
ω
θ
ω ω
θ
θ
Using this,
I  
d
sin
d
= m B
ω
ω
θ
θ
Integrating from θ = 0 to θ = π/2,
Example 4.11
(a) A current-carrying circular loop lies on a smooth horizontal plane.
Can a uniform magnetic field be set up in such a manner that
the loop turns around itself (i.e., turns about the vertical axis).
(b) A current-carrying circular loop is located in a uniform external
magnetic field. If the loop is
free to turn, what is its orientation
of stable equilibrium? Show that in this orientation, the flux of
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 22 :
 Physics
128
 EXAMPLE 4.11
the total field (external field + field produced by the loop) is
maximum.
 (c) A loop of irregular shape carrying current is located in an external
magnetic field. If the wire is flexible, why does it change to a
circular shape?
Solution
(a) No, because that would require τττττ to be in the vertical direction.
But τττττ = I A × B, and since A of the horizontal loop is in the vertical
direction, τ would be in the plane of the loop for any B.
(b) Orientation of stable equilibrium is one where the area vector A
of the loop is in the direction of external magnetic field. In this
orientation, the magnetic field produced by the loop is in the same
direction as external field, both normal to the  plane of the loop,
thus giving rise to maximum flux of the total field.
(c) It assumes circular shape with its plane normal to the field to
maximise flux, since for a given perimeter, a circle encloses greater
area than any other shape.
4.9.2  Circular current loop as a magnetic dipole
In this section, we shall consider the elementary magnetic element: the
current loop. We shall show that the magnetic field (at large distances)
due to current in a circular current loop is very similar in behaviour to
the electric field of an electric dipole. In Section 4.5, we have evaluated
the magnetic field on the axis of a circular loop, of a radius R, carrying a
steady current I. The magnitude of this field is [(Eq. (4.11)],
(
)
µ
=
+
2
0
3/2
2
2
2
I R
B
x
R
and its direction is along the axis and given by the right-hand thumb
rule (Fig. 4.10). Here, x is the distance along the axis from the centre of
the loop. For x >> R, we may drop the R2 term in the denominator. Thus,
µ
=
2
0
3
2
IR
B
x
Note that the area of the loop A = πR2. Thus,
µ
=
π
0
3
2
IA
B
x
As earlier, we define the magnetic moment m to have a magnitude IA,
m  = I A. Hence,
B
m
≃µ0
3
2 πx
    
π
µ
=
0
3
2
4
x
m
[4.25(a)]
The expression of Eq. [4.25(a)] is very similar to an expression obtained
earlier for the electric field of a dipole. The similarity may be seen if we
substitute,
 µ
ε
→
0
0
1/
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 23 :
 129
Moving Charges and
Magnetism
e
→
m
p  (electrostatic dipole)
 
→
B
E   (electrostatic field)
We then obtain,
3
0
2
4
e
x
ε
=
π
p
E
which is precisely the field for an electric dipole at a point on its axis.
considered in Chapter 1, Section 1.9 [Eq. (1.20)].
It can be shown that the above analogy can be carried further. We
had found in Chapter 1 that the electric field on the perpendicular bisector
of the dipole is given by [See Eq.(1.21)],
E ≃
pe
x
4
0
3
πε
where x is the distance from the dipole. If we replace p à m and 
0
0
1/
µ
ε
→
in the above expression, we obtain the result for B for a point in the
plane of the loop at a distance x  from the centre. For  x >>R,
B
m
≃µ0
3
4π x
x
R
;
>>
[4.25(b)]
The results given by Eqs. [4.25(a)] and [4.25(b)] become exact for a
point magnetic dipole.
The results obtained above can be shown to apply to any planar loop:
a planar current loop is equivalent to a magnetic dipole of dipole moment
m = I A, which is the analogue of electric dipole moment p. Note, however,
a fundamental difference: an electric dipole is built up of two elementary
units — the charges (or electric monopoles). In magnetism, a magnetic
dipole (or a current loop) is the most elementary element. The equivalent
of electric charges, i.e., magnetic monopoles, are not known to exist.
We have shown that a current loop (i) produces a magnetic field (see
Fig. 4.10) and behaves like a magnetic dipole at large distances, and
(ii) is subject to torque like a magnetic needle. This led Ampere to suggest
that all magnetism is due to circulating currents. This seems to be partly
true and no magnetic monopoles have been seen so far. However,
elementary particles such as an electron or a proton also carry an intrinsic
magnetic moment, not accounted by circulating currents.
4.10  THE MOVING COIL GALVANOMETER
Currents and voltages in circuits have been discussed extensively in
Chapters 3. But how do we measure them? How do we claim that
current in a circuit is 1.5 A or the voltage drop across a resistor is 1.2 V?
Figure 4.20 exhibits a very useful instrument for this purpose: the moving
coil galvanometer (MCG). It is a device whose principle can be understood
on the basis of our discussion in Section 4.9.
The galvanometer consists of a coil, with many turns, free to rotate
about a fixed axis (Fig. 4.20), in a uniform radial magnetic field. There is
a cylindrical soft iron core which not only makes the field radial but also
increases the strength of the magnetic field.  When a current flows through
the coil, a torque acts on it. This torque is given by Eq. (4.20) to be
τ = NI AB
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 24 :
 Physics
130
where the symbols have their usual meaning. Since
the field is radial by design, we have taken sin θ = 1 in
the above expression for the torque. The magnetic
torque NIAB tends to rotate the coil. A spring Sp
provides a counter torque kφ that balances the
magnetic torque NIAB; resulting in a steady angular
deflection φ. In equilibrium
kφ = NI AB
where k is the torsional constant of the spring; i.e. the
restoring torque per unit twist. The deflection φ is
indicated on the scale by a pointer attached to the
spring. We have
φ = 



NAB
k
I
(4.26)
The quantity in brackets is a constant for a given
galvanometer.
The galvanometer can be used in a number of ways.
It can be used as a detector to check if a current is
flowing in the circuit. We have come across this usage
in the Wheatstone’s bridge arrangement. In this usage
the neutral position of the pointer (when no current is
flowing through the galvanometer) is in the middle of
the scale and not at the left end as shown in Fig.4.20.
Depending on the direction of the current, the pointer’s
deflection is either to the right or the left.
The galvanometer cannot as such be used as an
ammeter to measure the value of the current in a given circuit. This is for
two reasons: (i) Galvanometer is a very sensitive device, it gives a full-
scale deflection for a current of the order of µA. (ii) For measuring currents,
the galvanometer has to be connected in series, and as it has a large
resistance, this will change the value of the current in the circuit. To
overcome these difficulties, one attaches a small resistance rs, called shunt
resistance, in parallel with the galvanometer coil; so that most of the
current passes through the shunt. The resistance of this arrangement is,
RG rs / (RG  + rs)   ≃  rs         if    RG >>  rs
If rs has small value, in relation to the resistance of the rest of the
circuit Rc, the effect of introducing the measuring instrument is also small
and negligible. This arrangement is schematically shown in Fig. 4.21.
The scale of this ammeter is calibrated and then graduated to read off
the current value with ease. We define the current sensitivity of the
galvanometer as the deflection per unit current. From Eq. (4.26) this
current sensitivity is,
NAB
I
k
φ =
(4.27)
A convenient way for the manufacturer  to increase the sensitivity is
to increase the number of turns N. We choose galvanometers having
sensitivities of value, required by our experiment.
FIGURE 4.20 The moving coil
galvanometer. Its elements are
described in the text. Depending on
the requirement, this device can be
used as a current detector or for
measuring the value of the current
(ammeter) or voltage (voltmeter).
FIGURE 4.21
Conversion of a
galvanometer (G) to
an ammeter by the
introduction of a
shunt resistance rs of
very small value in
parallel.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 25 :
 131
Moving Charges and
Magnetism
The galvanometer can also be used as a voltmeter to measure the
voltage across a given section of the circuit. For this it must be connected
in parallel with that section of the circuit. Further, it must draw a very
small current, otherwise the voltage measurement will disturb the original
set up by an amount which is very large. Usually we like to keep the
disturbance due to the measuring device below one per cent.  To ensure
this, a large resistance R is connected in series with the galvanometer.
This arrangement is schematically depicted in Fig.4.22. Note that the
resistance of the voltmeter is now,
RG + R ≃ R :  large
The scale of the voltmeter is calibrated to read off the voltage value
with ease. We define the voltage sensitivity as the deflection per unit
voltage. From Eq. (4.26),
φ
V
NAB
k
I
V
NAB
k
R
= 



= 



1
(4.28)
An interesting point to note is that increasing the current sensitivity
may not necessarily increase the voltage sensitivity. Let us take Eq. (4.27)
which provides a measure of current sensitivity. If N → 2N, i.e., we double
the number of turns, then
2
I
I
φ
φ
→
Thus, the current sensitivity doubles. However, the resistance of the
galvanometer is also likely to double, since it is proportional to the length
of the wire. In Eq. (4.28), N →2N, and R →2R, thus the voltage sensitivity,
V
V
φ
φ
→
remains unchanged. So in general, the modification needed for conversion
of a galvanometer to an ammeter  will be different from what is needed for
converting it into a voltmeter.
Example 4.12 In the circuit (Fig. 4.23) the current is to be
measured. What is the value of the current if the ammeter shown
(a) is a galvanometer with a resistance RG = 60.00 Ω; (b) is a
galvanometer described in (a) but converted to an ammeter by a
shunt resistance rs = 0.02 Ω; (c) is an ideal ammeter with zero
resistance?
FIGURE 4.23
FIGURE 4.22
Conversion of a
galvanometer (G) to a
voltmeter by the
introduction of a
resistance R of large
value in series.
EXAMPLE 4.12
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 26 :
 Physics
132
SUMMARY
1.
The total force on a charge q moving with velocity v in the presence of
magnetic and electric fields B and E, respectively is called the Lorentz
force. It is given by the expression:
F = q (v × B + E)
The magnetic force q (v × B) is normal to v and work done by it is zero.
2.
A straight conductor of length l and carrying a steady current I
experiences a force F in a uniform external magnetic field B,
F = I l × B
where|l| = l and the direction of l is given by the direction of the
current.
3.
In a uniform magnetic field B, a charge q executes a circular orbit in
a plane normal to B. Its frequency of uniform circular motion is called
the cyclotron frequency and is given by:
2
c
q B
m
ν =
π
This frequency is independent of the particle’s speed and radius. This
fact is exploited in a machine, the cyclotron, which is used to
accelerate charged particles.
4.
The Biot-Savart law asserts that the magnetic field dB due to an
element dl carrying a steady current I at a point P at a distance r from
the current element is:
0
3
d
d
4
I
r
µ
×
=
π
l
r
B
To obtain the total field at P, we must integrate this vector expression
over the entire length of the conductor.
5.
The magnitude of the magnetic field due to a circular coil of radius R
carrying a current I at an axial distance x from the centre is
EXAMPLE 4.12
Solution
(a) Total resistance in the circuit is,
3
63
G
R
+
=
Ω. Hence, I = 3/63 = 0.048 A.
(b) Resistance of the galvanometer converted to an ammeter is,
R
r
R
r
G
s
G
s
+
=
×
+
60
0 02
60
0 02
Ω
Ω
Ω
.
(
.
)
 ≃ 0.02Ω
Total resistance in the circuit is,
0.02
3
3.02
Ω+
Ω=
Ω. Hence, I = 3/3.02 = 0.99 A.
(c) For the ideal ammeter with zero resistance,
 I =  3/3 = 1.00 A
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 27 :
 133
Moving Charges and
Magnetism
2
0
2
2 3/2
2(
)
IR
B
x
R
µ
=
+
At the centre this reduces to
0
2
I
B
R
µ
=
6.
Ampere’s Circuital Law:  Let an open surface S be bounded by a loop
C. Then the Ampere’s law states that 
B
l
.d
I
=
∫
µ0
CÑ
 where I refers to
the current passing through S. The sign of I is determined from the
right-hand rule. We have discussed a simplified form of this law. If B
is directed along the tangent to every point on the perimeter L of a
closed curve and is constant in magnitude along perimeter then,
BL = µ0 Ie
where Ie is the net current enclosed by the closed circuit.
7.
The magnitude of the magnetic field at a distance R from a long,
straight wire carrying a current I is given by:
π
0
2
I
B
R
µ
=
The field lines are circles concentric with the wire.
8.
The magnitude of the field B inside a long solenoid carrying a current
I is
B = µ0nI
where n is the number of turns per unit length.
9.
Parallel currents attract and anti-parallel currents repel.
10. A planar loop carrying a current I, having N closely wound turns, and
an area A possesses a magnetic moment m where,
m = N I A
and the direction of m is given by the right-hand thumb rule : curl
the palm of your right hand along the loop with the fingers pointing
in the direction of the current. The thumb sticking out gives the
direction of m (and A)
When this loop is placed in a uniform magnetic field B, the force F on
it is:  F = 0
And the torque on it is,
τ = m × B
In a moving coil galvanometer, this torque is balanced by a counter-
torque due to a spring, yielding
kφ = NI AB
where φ  is the equilibrium deflection and k the torsion constant of
the spring.
11. A moving coil galvanometer can be converted into a ammeter by
introducing a shunt resistance rs, of small value in parallel. It can be
converted into a voltmeter by introducing a resistance of a large value
in series.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 28 :
 Physics
134
Physical Quantity
Symbol
Nature
Dimensions
Units
Remarks
Permeability of free
µ0
Scalar
[MLT –2A–2]
T m A–1
4π × 10–7 T m A–1
space
Magnetic Field
B
Vector
[M T –2A–1]
T (telsa)
Magnetic Moment
m
Vector
[L2A]
A m2 or J/T
Torsion Constant
k
  Scalar
[M L2T –2]
    N m rad–1
Appears in MCG
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
Electrostatic field lines originate at a positive charge and terminate at a
negative charge or fade at infinity. Magnetic field lines always form
closed loops.
2.
The discussion in this Chapter holds only for steady currents which do
not vary with time.
When currents vary with time Newton’s third law is valid only if momentum
carried by the electromagnetic field is taken into account.
3.
Recall the expression for the Lorentz force,
F = q (v × B + E)
This velocity dependent force has occupied the attention of some of the
greatest scientific thinkers. If one switches to a frame with instantaneous
velocity v, the magnetic part of the force vanishes. The motion of the
charged particle is then explained by arguing that there exists an
appropriate electric field in the new frame. We shall not discuss the
details of this mechanism. However, we stress that the resolution of this
paradox implies that electricity and magnetism are linked phenomena
(electromagnetism) and that the Lorentz force expression does not imply
a universal preferred frame of reference in nature.
4.
Ampere’s Circuital law is not independent of the Biot-Savart law. It
can be derived from the Biot-Savart law. Its relationship to the
Biot-Savart law is similar to the relationship between Gauss’s law and
Coulomb’s law.
EXERCISES
4.1
A circular coil of wire consisting of 100 turns, each of radius 8.0 cm
carries a current of 0.40 A. What is the magnitude of the magnetic
field B at the centre of the coil?
4.2
A long straight wire carries a current of 35 A. What is the magnitude
of the field B at a point 20 cm from the wire?
4.3
A long straight wire in the horizontal plane carries a current of 50 A
in north to south direction. Give the magnitude and direction of B
at a point 2.5 m east of the wire.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 29 :
 135
Moving Charges and
Magnetism
4.4
A horizontal overhead power line carries a current of 90 A in east to
west direction. What is the magnitude and direction of the magnetic
field due to the current 1.5 m below the line?
4.5
What is the magnitude of magnetic force per unit length on a wire
carrying a current of 8 A and making an angle of 30º with the direction
of a uniform magnetic field of  0.15 T?
4.6
A 3.0 cm wire carrying a current of 10 A is placed inside a solenoid
perpendicular to its axis. The magnetic field inside the solenoid is
given to be 0.27 T. What is the magnetic force on the wire?
4.7
Two long and parallel straight wires A and B carrying currents of
8.0 A and 5.0 A in the same direction are separated by a distance of
4.0 cm. Estimate the force on a 10 cm section of wire A.
4.8
A closely wound solenoid 80 cm long has 5 layers of windings of 400
turns each. The diameter of the solenoid is 1.8 cm. If the current
carried is 8.0 A, estimate the magnitude of B inside the solenoid
near its centre.
4.9
A square coil of side 10 cm consists of 20 turns and carries a current
of 12 A. The coil is suspended vertically and the normal to the plane
of the coil makes an angle of 30º with the direction of a uniform
horizontal magnetic field of magnitude 0.80 T. What is the magnitude
of torque experienced by the coil?
4.10
Two moving coil meters, M1 and M2 have the following particulars:
R1 = 10 Ω,  N1 = 30,
A1 = 3.6 × 10–3 m2, B1 = 0.25 T
R2 = 14 Ω,  N2 = 42,
A2 = 1.8 × 10–3 m2, B2 = 0.50 T
(The spring constants are identical for the two meters).
Determine the ratio of (a) current sensitivity and (b) voltage
sensitivity of M2 and M1.
4.11
In a chamber, a uniform magnetic field of 6.5 G (1 G = 10–4 T) is
maintained. An electron is shot into the field with a speed of
4.8 × 106 m s–1 normal to the field. Explain why the  path of the
electron is a circle. Determine the radius of the circular orbit.
(e = 1.5 × 10–19 C, me = 9.1×10–31 kg)
4.12
In Exercise 4.11 obtain the frequency of revolution of the electron in
its circular orbit. Does the answer depend on the speed of the
electron? Explain.
4.13
(a) A circular coil of 30 turns and radius 8.0 cm carrying a current
of 6.0 A is suspended vertically in a uniform horizontal magnetic
field of magnitude 1.0 T. The field lines make an angle of 60°
with the normal of the coil. Calculate the magnitude of the
counter torque that must be applied to prevent the coil from
turning.
(b) Would your answer change, if the circular coil in (a) were replaced
by a planar coil of some irregular shape that encloses the same
area? (All other particulars are also unaltered.)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 1 :
 Physics
136
5.1  INTRODUCTION
Magnetic phenomena are universal in nature. Vast, distant galaxies, the
tiny invisible atoms, humans and beasts all are permeated through and
through with a host of magnetic fields from a variety of sources. The earth’s
magnetism predates human evolution. The word magnet is derived from
the name of an island in Greece called magnesia where magnetic ore
deposits were found, as early as 600 BC.
In the previous chapter we have learned that moving charges or electric
currents produce magnetic fields. This discovery, which was made in the
early part of the nineteenth century is credited to Oersted, Ampere, Biot
and Savart, among others.
In the present chapter, we take a look at magnetism as a subject in its
own right.
Some of the commonly known ideas regarding magnetism are:
(i)
The earth behaves as a magnet with the magnetic field pointing
approximately from the geographic south to the north.
(ii) When a bar magnet is freely suspended, it points in  the north-south
direction. The tip which points to the geographic north is called the
north pole and the tip which points to the geographic south is called
the south pole of the magnet.
Chapter Five
MAGNETISM AND
MATTER
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 2 :
 137
Magnetism and
Matter
(iii) There is a repulsive force when north poles ( or south poles ) of two
magnets are brought close together. Conversely, there is an attractive
force between the north pole of one magnet and the south pole of
the other.
(iv) We cannot isolate the north, or south pole of a magnet. If a bar magnet
is broken into two halves, we get two similar bar magnets with
somewhat weaker properties. Unlike electric charges, isolated magnetic
north and south poles known as magnetic monopoles do not exist.
(v) It is possible to make magnets out of iron and its alloys.
We begin with a description of a bar magnet and its behaviour in an
external magnetic field. We describe Gauss’s law of magnetism. We next
describe how materials can be classified on the basis of their magnetic
properties. We describe para-, dia-, and ferromagnetism.
5.2  T
5.2  T
5.2  T
5.2  T
5.2  THE
HE
HE
HE
HE B
 B
 B
 B
 BAR
AR
AR
AR
AR M
 M
 M
 M
 MAGNET
AGNET
AGNET
AGNET
AGNET
We begin our study by examining iron
filings sprinkled on a sheet of glass placed
over a short bar magnet. The arrangement
of iron filings is shown in Fig. 5.1.
     The pattern of iron filings suggests
that the magnet has two poles similar to
the positive and negative charge of an
electric dipole. As mentioned in the
introductory section, one pole is
designated the North pole and the other,
the South pole. When suspended freely,
these poles point approximately towards
the geographic north and south poles,
respectively. A similar pattern of iron
filings is observed around a current
carrying solenoid.
5.2.1  The magnetic field lines
5.2.1  The magnetic field lines
5.2.1  The magnetic field lines
5.2.1  The magnetic field lines
5.2.1  The magnetic field lines
The pattern of iron filings permits us to plot
the magnetic field lines*****. This is shown both
for the bar-magnet and the current-
carrying solenoid in  Fig. 5.2. For
comparison refer to the Chapter 1, Figure 1.14(d). Electric field lines of an
electric dipole are also displayed in Fig. 5.2(c). The magnetic field lines are a
visual and intuitive realisation of the magnetic field. Their properties are:
(i)
The magnetic field lines of a magnet (or a solenoid) form continuous
closed loops. This is unlike the electric dipole where these field lines
begin from a positive charge and end on the negative charge or escape
to infinity.
*****
In some textbooks the magnetic field lines are called magnetic lines of force.
This nomenclature is avoided since it can be confusing. Unlike electrostatics
the field lines in magnetism do not indicate the direction of the force on a
(moving) charge.
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE 5.1
 5.1
 5.1
 5.1
 5.1 The arrangement
of iron filings surrounding a bar
magnet. The pattern mimics
magnetic field lines. The pattern
suggests that the bar magnet is
a magnetic dipole.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 3 :
 Physics
138
(ii) The tangent to the field line at a given
point represents the direction of the net
magnetic field B at that point.
(iii) The larger the number of field lines
crossing per unit area, the stronger is
the magnitude of the magnetic field B.
In Fig. 5.2(a), B is larger around
region  ii  than in region  i  .
(iv) The magnetic field lines do not
intersect, for if they did, the direction
of the magnetic field would not be
unique at the point of intersection.
One can plot the magnetic field lines
in a variety of ways. One way is to place a
small magnetic compass needle at various
positions and note its orientation. This
gives us an idea of the magnetic field
direction at various points in space.
5.2.2  Bar magnet as an
equivalent solenoid
In the previous chapter, we have
explained how a current loop acts as a
magnetic dipole (Section 4.9). We
mentioned Ampere’s hypothesis that all
magnetic phenomena can be explained in
terms of circulating currents.
FIGURE 5.3 Calculation of (a) The axial field of a
finite solenoid in order to demonstrate its
similarity to that of a bar magnet. (b) A magnetic
needle in a uniform magnetic field B. The
arrangement may be used to determine either B
or the magnetic moment m of the needle.
FIGURE 5.2 The field lines of (a) a bar magnet, (b) a current-carrying finite solenoid and
(c) electric dipole. At large distances, the field lines are very similar. The curves
labelled  i  and ii are closed Gaussian surfaces.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 4 :
 139
Magnetism and
Matter
The resemblance of magnetic field lines for a bar magnet and a solenoid
suggest that a bar magnet may be thought of as a large number of
circulating currents in analogy with a solenoid. Cutting a bar magnet in
half is like cutting a solenoid. We get two smaller solenoids with weaker
magnetic properties. The field lines remain continuous, emerging from
one face of the solenoid and entering into the other face. One can test this
analogy by moving a small compass needle in the neighbourhood of a
bar magnet and a current-carrying finite solenoid and noting that the
deflections of the needle are similar in both cases.
To make this analogy more firm we may calculate the axial field of a
finite solenoid depicted in Fig. 5.3 (a). We can demonstrate that at large
distances this axial field resembles that of a bar magnet.
The magnitude of the field at point P due to the solenoid is
0
3
2
4
m
B
r
µ
π
=
(5.1)
This is also the far axial magnetic field of a bar magnet which one may
obtain experimentally. Thus, a bar magnet and a solenoid produce similar
magnetic fields. The magnetic moment of a bar magnet is thus equal to
the magnetic moment of an equivalent solenoid that produces the same
magnetic field.
5.2.3  The dipole in a uniform magnetic field
Let’s place a small compass needle of known magnetic moment m allowing
it to oscillate in the magnetic field. This arrangement is shown in
Fig. 5.3(b).
The torque on the needle is [see Eq. (4.23)],
τττττ = m × B
(5.2)
In magnitude τ = mB sinθ
Here τττττ  is restoring torque and θ is the angle between m and B.
An expression for magnetic potential energy can be obtained on lines
similar to  electrostatic potential energy.
The magnetic potential energy Um is given by
U
d
m = ∫τ θ
θ
( )
      =
= −
∫mB
d
mB
sin
cos
θ
θ
θ
      = –m.B
(5.3)
We have emphasised in Chapter 2 that the zero of potential energy
can be fixed at one’s convenience. Taking the constant of integration to be
zero means fixing the zero of potential energy at θ = 90°, i.e., when the
needle is perpendicular to the field. Equation (5.3) shows that potential
energy is minimum (= –mB) at θ = 0° (most stable position) and maximum
(= +mB) at θ = 180° (most unstable position).
Example 5.1
(a) What happens if a bar magnet is cut into two pieces: (i) transverse
to its length, (ii) along its length?
(b) A magnetised needle in a uniform magnetic field experiences a
torque but no net force. An iron nail near a bar magnet, however,
experiences a force of attraction in addition to a torque. Why?
 EXAMPLE 5.1
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 5 :
 Physics
140
 EXAMPLE 5.1
(c) Must every magnetic configuration have a north pole and a south
pole? What about the field due to a toroid?
(d) Two identical looking iron bars A and B are given, one of which
is definitely known to be magnetised. (We do not know which
one.) How would one ascertain whether or not both are
magnetised? If only one is magnetised, how does one ascertain
which one?  [Use nothing else but the bars A and B.]
Solution
(a) In either case, one gets two magnets, each with a north and
south pole.
(b) No force if the field is uniform. The iron nail experiences a non-
uniform field due to the bar magnet. There is induced magnetic
moment in the nail, therefore, it experiences both force and
torque. The net force is attractive because the induced south
pole (say) in the nail is closer to the north pole of magnet than
induced north pole.
(c) Not necessarily. True only if the source of the field has a net
non-zero magnetic moment. This is not so for a toroid or even for
a straight infinite conductor.
(d) Try to bring different ends of the bars closer. A repulsive force in
some situation establishes that both are magnetised. If it is
always attractive, then one of them is not magnetised. In a bar
magnet the intensity of the magnetic field is the strongest at the
two ends (poles) and weakest at the central region. This fact
may be used to  determine whether A or B is the magnet. In this
case, to see which one of the two bars is a magnet, pick up one,
(say, A) and lower one of its ends; first on one of the ends of the
other (say, B), and then on the middle of B. If you notice that in
the middle of B, A experiences no force, then B is magnetised. If
you do not notice any change from the end to the middle of B,
then A is magnetised.
5.2.4  The electrostatic analog
Comparison of Eqs. (5.1), (5.2) and (5.3) with the corresponding equations
for electric dipole (Chapter 1), suggests that magnetic field at large
distances due to a bar magnet of magnetic moment m can be obtained
from the equation for electric field due to an electric dipole of dipole moment
p, by making the following replacements:
→
E
B , 
→
p
m , 
0
0
1
4
4
µ
ε
→
π
π
In particular, we can write down the equatorial field (BE) of a bar magnet
at a distance r, for r >> l, where l is the size of the magnet:
0
3
4
E
r
µ
= −
π
m
B
(5.4)
Likewise, the axial field (BA) of a bar magnet for r >> l is:
0
3
2
4
A
r
µ
=
π
m
B
(5.5)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 6 :
 141
Magnetism and
Matter
Equation (5.5) is just Eq. (5.1) in the vector form. Table 5.1 summarises
the analogy between electric and magnetic dipoles.
Electrostatics
Magnetism
1/ε0
µ0
Dipole moment
p
m
Equatorial Field for a short dipole
–p/4πε0r 3
– µ0 m / 4π r 3
Axial Field for a short dipole
2p/4πε0r 3
µ0 2m / 4π r 3
External Field: torque
p × E
m × B
External Field: Energy
–p.E
–m.B
TABLE 5.1 THE DIPOLE ANALOGY
 EXAMPLE 5.2
Example 5.2  Figure 5.4 shows a small magnetised needle P placed
at a point O. The arrow shows the direction of its magnetic moment.
The other arrows show different positions (and orientations of the
magnetic moment) of another identical magnetised needle Q.
(a) In which configuration the system is not in equilibrium?
(b) In which configuration is the system in (i) stable, and (ii) unstable
equilibrium?
(c) Which configuration corresponds to the lowest potential energy
among all the configurations shown?
FIGURE 5.4
Solution
Potential energy of the configuration arises due to the potential energy of
one dipole (say, Q) in the magnetic field due to other (P). Use the result
that the field due to P is given by the expression [Eqs. (5.4) and (5.5)]:
0
P
P
3
4
r
µ
π
= −
m
B
     (on the normal bisector)
0
P
P
3
2
4
r
µ
π
=
m
B
     (on the axis)
where mP is the magnetic moment of the dipole P.
Equilibrium is stable when mQ is parallel to BP, and unstable when it
is anti-parallel to BP.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 7 :
 Physics
142
KARL FRIEDRICH GAUSS (1777 – 1855)
Karl Friedrich Gauss
(1777 – 1855) He was a
child prodigy and was gifted
in mathematics, physics,
engineering, astronomy
and even land surveying.
The properties of numbers
fascinated him, and in his
work he anticipated major
mathematical development
of later times. Along with
Wilhelm Welser, he built the
first electric telegraph in
1833. His mathematical
theory of curved surface
laid the foundation for the
later work of Riemann.
For instance for the configuration Q3 for which Q is along the
perpendicular bisector of the dipole P, the magnetic moment of Q is
parallel to the magnetic field at the position 3. Hence Q3 is stable.
Thus,
(a) PQ1 and PQ2
(b) (i) PQ3, PQ6 (stable); (ii) PQ5, PQ4 (unstable)
(c) PQ6
5.3  MAGNETISM AND GAUSS’S LAW
In Chapter 1, we studied Gauss’s law for electrostatics.
In Fig 5.2(c), we see that for a closed surface represented
by  i , the number of lines leaving the surface is equal to
the number of lines entering it. This is consistent with the
fact that no net charge is enclosed by the surface. However,
in the same figure, for the closed surface ii , there is a net
outward flux, since it does include a net (positive) charge.
The situation is radically different for magnetic fields
which are continuous and form closed loops. Examine the
Gaussian surfaces represented by  i  or  ii  in Fig 5.2(a) or
Fig. 5.2(b). Both cases visually demonstrate that the
number of magnetic field lines leaving the surface is
balanced by the number of lines entering it. The net
magnetic flux is zero for both the surfaces. This is true
for any closed surface.
FIGURE 5.5
Consider a small vector area element ∆S of a closed surface S as in
Fig. 5.5. The magnetic flux through ÄS is defined as ∆φB = B.∆S, where B
is the field  at ∆S. We divide S into many small area elements and calculate
the individual flux through each. Then, the net flux φB is,
φ
φ
B
B
all
all
=
=
=
∑
∑
∆
∆
’
’
’
’
B
S
.
0
(5.6)
where ‘all’ stands for ‘all area elements ∆S′. Compare this with the Gauss’s
law of electrostatics. The flux through a closed surface in that case is
given by
E
S
.∆
=
∑
q
ε0
 EXAMPLE 5.2
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 8 :
 143
Magnetism and
Matter
where q is the electric charge enclosed by the surface.
The difference between the Gauss’s law of magnetism and that for
electrostatics is a reflection of the fact that isolated magnetic poles (also
called monopoles) are not known to exist. There are no sources or sinks
of B; the simplest magnetic element is a dipole or a current loop. All
magnetic phenomena can be explained in terms of an arrangement of
dipoles and/or current loops.
Thus, Gauss’s law for magnetism is:
The net magnetic flux through any closed surface is zero.
Example 5.3  Many of the diagrams given in Fig. 5.6 show magnetic
field lines (thick lines in the figure) wrongly. Point out what is wrong
with them. Some of them may describe electrostatic field lines correctly.
Point out which ones.
FIGURE 5.6
 EXAMPLE 5.3
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 9 :
 Physics
144
 EXAMPLE 5.4
 EXAMPLE 5.3
Solution
(a) Wrong. Magnetic field lines can never emanate from a point, as
shown in figure. Over any closed surface, the net flux of B must
always be zero, i.e., pictorially as many field lines should seem to
enter the surface as the number of lines leaving it. The field lines
shown, in fact, represent electric field of a long positively charged
wire. The correct magnetic field lines are circling the straight
conductor, as described in Chapter 4.
(b) Wrong. Magnetic field lines (like electric field lines) can never cross
each other, because otherwise the direction of field at the point of
intersection is ambiguous. There is further error in the figure.
Magnetostatic field lines can never form closed loops around empty
space. A closed loop of static magnetic field line must enclose a
region across which a current is passing. By contrast, electrostatic
field lines can never form closed loops, neither in empty space,
nor when the loop encloses charges.
(c) Right. Magnetic lines are completely confined within a toroid.
Nothing wrong here in field lines forming closed loops, since each
loop encloses a region across which a current passes. Note, for
clarity of figure, only a few field lines within the toroid have been
shown. Actually, the entire region enclosed by the windings
contains magnetic field.
(d) Wrong. Field lines due to a solenoid at its ends and outside cannot
be so completely straight and confined; such a thing violates
Ampere’s law. The lines should curve out at both ends, and meet
eventually to form closed loops.
(e) Right. These are field lines outside and inside a bar magnet. Note
carefully the direction of field lines inside. Not all field lines emanate
out of a north pole (or converge into a south pole). Around both
the N-pole, and the S-pole, the net flux of the field is zero.
(f ) Wrong. These field lines cannot possibly represent a magnetic field.
Look at the upper region. All the field lines seem to emanate out of
the shaded plate. The net flux through a surface surrounding the
shaded plate is not zero. This is impossible for a magnetic field.
The given field lines, in fact, show the electrostatic field lines
around a positively charged upper plate and a negatively charged
lower plate. The difference between Fig. [5.6(e) and (f)]  should be
carefully grasped.
(g) Wrong. Magnetic field lines between two pole pieces cannot be
precisely straight at the ends. Some fringing of lines is inevitable.
Otherwise, Ampere’s law is violated. This is also true for electric
field lines.
Example 5.4
(a) Magnetic field lines show the direction (at every point) along which
a small magnetised needle aligns (at the point). Do the magnetic
field lines also represent the lines of force on a moving charged
particle at every point?
(b) If magnetic monopoles existed, how would the Gauss’s law of
magnetism be modified?
(c) Does a bar magnet exert a torque on itself due to its own field?
Does one element of a current-carrying wire exert a force on another
element of the same wire?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 10 :
 145
Magnetism and
Matter
 EXAMPLE 5.4
(d) Magnetic field arises due to charges in motion. Can a system
have magnetic moments even though its net charge is zero?
Solution
(a) No. The magnetic force is always normal to B (remember magnetic
force = qv × B). It is misleading to call magnetic field lines as lines
of force.
(b) Gauss’s law of magnetism states that the flux of B through any
closed surface is always zero 
B
s
.∆
=
∫
0
s
.
If monopoles existed, the right hand side would be equal to the
monopole (magnetic charge) qm enclosed by S. [Analogous to
Gauss’s law of electrostatics, 
B
s
.∆
=
∫
µ0qm
S
 where qm is the
(monopole) magnetic charge enclosed by S.]
(c) No. There is no force or torque on an element due to the field
produced by that element itself. But there is a force (or torque)
on an element of the same wire. (For the special case of a straight
wire, this force is zero.)
(d) Yes. The average of the charge in the system may be zero. Yet,
the mean of the magnetic moments due to various current loops
may not be zero. We will come across such examples in connection
with paramagnetic material where atoms have net dipole moment
through their net charge is zero.
5.4  MAGNETISATION AND MAGNETIC INTENSITY
The earth abounds with a bewildering variety of elements and compounds.
In addition, we have been synthesising new alloys, compounds and even
elements. One would like to classify the magnetic properties of these
substances. In the present section, we define and explain certain terms
which will help us to carry out this exercise.
We have seen that a circulating electron in an atom has a magnetic
moment. In a bulk material, these moments add up vectorially and they
can give a net magnetic moment which is non-zero. We define
magnetisation M of a sample to be equal to its net magnetic moment per
unit volume:
net
V
= m
M
(5.7)
M is a vector with dimensions L–1 A and is measured in a units of A m–1.
Consider a long solenoid of n turns per unit length and carrying a
current I. The magnetic field in the interior of the solenoid was shown to
be given by
B0 = µ0 nI
(5.8)
If the interior of the solenoid is filled with a material with non-zero
magnetisation, the field inside the solenoid will be greater than B0. The
net B field in the interior of the solenoid may be expressed as
B = B0 + Bm
(5.9)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 11 :
 Physics
146
 EXAMPLE 5.5
where Bm is the field contributed by the material core. It turns out that
this additional field Bm is proportional to the magnetisation M of the
material and is expressed as
Bm = µ0M
(5.10)
where µ0 is the same constant (permittivity of vacuum) that appears in
Biot-Savart’s law.
It is convenient to introduce another vector field H, called the magnetic
intensity, which is defined by
0
–
µ
= B
H
M
(5.11)
where H has the same dimensions as M and is measured in units of A m–1.
Thus, the total magnetic field B is written as
B = µ0 (H + M)
(5.12)
We repeat our defining procedure. We have partitioned the contribution
to the total magnetic field inside the sample into two parts: one, due to
external factors such as the current in the solenoid. This is represented
by H. The other is due to the specific nature of the magnetic material,
namely M. The latter quantity can be influenced by external factors. This
influence is mathematically expressed as
χ
=
M
H
(5.13)
where χ , a dimensionless quantity, is appropriately called the magnetic
susceptibility. It is a measure of how a magnetic material responds to an
external field. χ is small and positive for materials, which are called
paramagnetic. It is small and negative for materials, which are termed
diamagnetic. In the latter case M and H are opposite in direction. From
Eqs. (5.12) and (5.13) we obtain,
0(1
)
µ
χ
=
+
B
H
(5.14)
= µ0 µr H
=  µ H
(5.15)
where µr= 1 + χ, is a dimensionless quantity called the relative magnetic
permeability of the substance. It is the analog of the dielectric constant in
electrostatics. The magnetic permeability of the substance is µ and it has
the same dimensions and units as µ0;
µ = µ0µr = µ0 (1+χ).
The three quantities χ, µr and µ are interrelated and only one of
them is independent. Given one, the other two may be easily determined.
Example 5.5 A solenoid has a core of a material with relative
permeability 400. The windings of the solenoid are insulated from the
core and carry a current of 2A. If the number of turns is 1000 per
metre, calculate (a) H, (b) M, (c) B and (d) the magnetising current Im.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 12 :
 147
Magnetism and
Matter
 EXAMPLE 5.5
Solution
(a) The field H is dependent of the material of the core, and is
H = nI = 1000 × 2.0 = 2 ×103 A/m.
(b) The magnetic field B is given by
B = µr µ0 H
   = 400 × 4π ×10–7 (N/A2) × 2 × 103 (A/m)
   = 1.0 T
(c) Magnetisation is given by
M = (B– µ0 H)/ µ0
    = (µr µ0 H–µ0 H)/µ0 = (µr – 1)H = 399 × H
     ≅ 8 × 105 A/m
(d) The magnetising current IM is the additional current that needs
to be passed through the windings of the solenoid in the absence
of the core which would give a B value as in the presence of the
core. Thus B = µr n (I + IM). Using I = 2A, B = 1 T, we get IM = 794 A.
5.5 MAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF MATERIALS
The discussion in the previous section helps us to classify materials as
diamagnetic, paramagnetic or ferromagnetic. In terms of the susceptibility
χ, a material is diamagnetic if χ is negative, para- if χ is positive and small,
and ferro- if χ is large and positive.
A glance at Table 5.2 gives one a better feeling for these materials.
Here ε is a small positive number introduced to quantify paramagnetic
materials. Next, we describe these materials in some detail.
TABLE 5.2
Diamagnetic
Paramagnetic
Ferromagnetic
–1 ≤ χ < 0
0 < χ <  ε
χ >> 1
0 ≤ µr < 1
1< µr < 1+ ε
µr >> 1
µ < µ0
µ > µ0
µ >> µ0
5.5.1  Diamagnetism
Diamagnetic substances are those which have tendency to move from
stronger to the weaker part of the external magnetic field. In other words,
unlike the way a magnet attracts metals like iron, it would repel a
diamagnetic substance.
Figure 5.7(a) shows a bar of diamagnetic material placed in an external
magnetic field. The field lines are repelled or expelled and the field inside
the material is reduced. In most cases, this reduction is slight, being one
part in 105. When placed in a non-uniform magnetic field, the bar will tend
to move from high to low field.
FIGURE 5.7
Behaviour of
magnetic field lines
near a
(a) diamagnetic,
(b) paramagnetic
substance.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 13 :
 Physics
148
The simplest explanation for diamagnetism is as follows. Electrons in
an atom orbiting around nucleus possess orbital angular momentum.
These orbiting electrons are equivalent to current-carrying loop and thus
possess orbital magnetic moment. Diamagnetic substances are the ones
in which resultant magnetic moment in an atom is zero. When magnetic
field is applied, those electrons having orbital magnetic moment in the
same direction slow down and those in the opposite direction speed up.
This happens due to induced current in accordance with Lenz’s law which
you will study in Chapter 6. Thus, the substance develops a net magnetic
moment in direction opposite to that of the applied field and hence repulsion.
Some diamagnetic materials are bismuth, copper, lead, silicon,
nitrogen (at STP), water and sodium chloride. Diamagnetism is present
in all the substances. However, the effect is so weak in most cases that it
gets shifted by other effects like paramagnetism, ferromagnetism, etc.
The most exotic diamagnetic materials are superconductors. These
are metals, cooled to very low temperatures which exhibits both perfect
conductivity and perfect diamagnetism. Here the field lines are completely
expelled!  χ = –1 and µr = 0. A superconductor repels a magnet and (by
Newton’s third law) is repelled by the magnet. The phenomenon of perfect
diamagnetism in superconductors is called the Meissner effect, after the
name of its discoverer. Superconducting magnets can be gainfully
exploited in variety of situations, for example, for running magnetically
levitated superfast trains.
5.5.2  Paramagnetism
Paramagnetic substances are those which get weakly magnetised when
placed in an external magnetic field. They have tendency to move from a
region of weak magnetic field to strong magnetic field, i.e., they get weakly
attracted to a magnet.
The individual atoms (or ions or molecules) of a paramagnetic material
possess a permanent magnetic dipole moment of their own. On account
of the ceaseless random thermal motion of the atoms, no net magnetisation
is seen. In the presence of an external field B0, which is strong enough,
and at low temperatures, the individual atomic dipole moment can be
made to align and point in the same direction as B0. Figure 5.7(b) shows
a bar of paramagnetic material placed in an external field. The field lines
gets concentrated inside the material, and the field inside is enhanced. In
most cases, this enhancement is slight, being one part in 105. When placed
in a non-uniform magnetic field, the bar will tend to move from weak field
to strong.
Some paramagnetic materials are aluminium, sodium, calcium,
oxygen (at STP) and copper chloride. For a paramagnetic material both χ
and µr depend not only on the material, but also (in a simple fashion) on
the sample temperature. As the field is increased or the temperature is
lowered, the magnetisation increases until it reaches the saturation value
at which point all the dipoles are perfectly aligned with the field.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 14 :
 149
Magnetism and
Matter
5.5.3  Ferromagnetism
Ferromagnetic substances are those which gets strongly magnetised when
placed in an external magnetic field. They have strong tendency to move
from a region of weak magnetic field to strong magnetic field, i.e., they get
strongly attracted to a magnet.
The individual atoms (or ions or molecules) in a ferromagnetic material
possess a dipole moment as in a paramagnetic material. However, they
interact with one another in such a way that they spontaneously align
themselves in a common direction over a macroscopic volume called
domain. The explanation of this cooperative effect requires quantum
mechanics and is beyond the scope of this textbook. Each domain has a
net magnetisation. Typical domain size is 1mm and the domain contains
about 1011 atoms. In the first instant, the magnetisation varies randomly
from domain to domain and there is no bulk magnetisation. This is shown
in Fig. 5.8(a). When we apply an external magnetic field B0, the domains
orient themselves in the direction of B0 and simultaneously the domain
oriented in the direction of B0 grow in size. This existence of domains and
their motion in B0 are not speculations. One may observe this under a
microscope after sprinkling a liquid suspension of powdered
ferromagnetic substance of samples. This motion of suspension can be
observed. Fig. 5.8(b) shows the situation when the domains have aligned
and amalgamated to form a single ‘giant’ domain.
 Thus, in a ferromagnetic material the field lines are highly
concentrated. In non-uniform magnetic field, the sample tends to move
towards the region of high field. We may wonder as to what happens
when the external field is removed. In some ferromagnetic materials the
magnetisation persists. Such materials are called hard magnetic materials
or hard ferromagnets. Alnico, an alloy of iron, aluminium, nickel, cobalt
and copper, is one such material. The naturally occurring lodestone is
another. Such materials form permanent magnets to be used among other
things as a compass needle. On the other hand, there is a class of
ferromagnetic materials in which the magnetisation disappears on removal
of the external field. Soft iron is one such material. Appropriately enough,
such materials are called soft ferromagnetic materials. There are a number
of elements, which are ferromagnetic: iron, cobalt, nickel, gadolinium,
etc. The relative magnetic permeability is >1000!
The ferromagnetic property depends on temperature. At high enough
temperature, a ferromagnet becomes a paramagnet. The domain structure
disintegrates with temperature. This disappearance of magnetisation with
temperature is gradual.
FIGURE 5.8
(a) Randomly
oriented domains,
(b) Aligned domains.
SUMMARY
1.
The science of magnetism is old. It has been known since ancient times
that magnetic materials tend to point in the north-south direction; like
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 15 :
 Physics
150
magnetic poles repel and unlike ones attract; and cutting a bar magnet
in two leads to two smaller magnets. Magnetic poles cannot be isolated.
2.
When a bar magnet of dipole moment m is placed in a uniform magnetic
field B,
     (a)
the force on it is zero,
     (b)
the torque on it is m × B,
     (c)
its potential energy is –m.B, where we choose the zero of energy at
the orientation when m is perpendicular to B.
3.
Consider a bar magnet of size l and magnetic moment m, at a distance
r from its mid-point, where r >>l, the magnetic field B due to this bar
is,
0
3
2
r
µ
=
π
m
B
    (along axis)
   =
0
3
– 4
r
µ
π
m     (along equator)
4.
Gauss’s law for magnetism states that the net magnetic flux through
any closed surface is zero
0






S
B
S
i
B
all area
elements
5.
Consider a material placed in an external magnetic field B0. The
magnetic intensity is defined as,
0
0
µ
= B
H
The magnetisation M of the material is its dipole moment per unit volume.
The magnetic field B in the material is,
      B = µ0 (H + M)
6.
For a linear material M = χ H. So that B = µ H and χ is called the
magnetic susceptibility of the material. The three quantities, χ, the
relative magnetic permeability µr, and the magnetic permeability µ  are
related as follows:
µ = µ0 µr
      µr = 1+ χ
7.
Magnetic materials are broadly classified as: diamagnetic, paramagnetic,
and ferromagnetic. For diamagnetic materials χ is negative and small
and for paramagnetic materials it is positive and small. Ferromagnetic
materials have large χ and are characterised by non-linear relation
between B and H.
8.
Substances, which at room temperature, retain their ferromagnetic
property for a long period of time are called permanent magnets.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 16 :
 151
Magnetism and
Matter
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
A satisfactory understanding of magnetic phenomenon in terms of moving
charges/currents was arrived at after 1800 AD. But technological
exploitation of the directional properties of magnets predates this scientific
understanding by two thousand years. Thus, scientific understanding is
not a necessary condition for engineering applications. Ideally, science
and engineering go hand-in-hand, one leading and assisting the other in
tandem.
2.
Magnetic monopoles do not exist. If you slice a magnet in half, you get
two smaller magnets. On the other hand, isolated positive and negative
charges exist. There exists a smallest unit of charge, for example, the
electronic charge with value |e| = 1.6 ×10–19 C. All other charges are
integral multiples of this smallest unit charge. In other words, charge is
quantised. We do not know why magnetic monopoles do not exist or why
electric charge is quantised.
3.
A consequence of the fact that magnetic monopoles do not exist is that
the magnetic field lines are continuous and form closed loops. In contrast,
the electrostatic lines of force begin on a positive charge and terminate
on the negative charge (or fade out at infinity).
4.
A miniscule difference in the value of χ, the magnetic susceptibility, yields
radically different behaviour: diamagnetic versus paramagnetic. For
diamagnetic materials χ = –10–5 whereas χ = +10–5 for paramagnetic
materials.
Physical quantity
Symbol
Nature
Dimensions
Units
Remarks
Permeability of
µ0
Scalar
[MLT–2 A–2]
T m A–1
µ0/4π = 10–7
free space
Magnetic field,
B
Vector
[MT–2 A–1]
T (tesla)
104 G (gauss) = 1 T
Magnetic induction,
Magnetic flux density
Magnetic moment
m
Vector
[L–2 A]
A m2
Magnetic flux
φB
Scalar
[ML2T–2 A–1]
W (weber)
W = T m2
Magnetisation
M
Vector
[L–1 A]
A m–1
Magnetic moment
Volume
Magnetic intensity
H
Vector
[L–1 A]
A m–1
B = µ0 (H + M)
Magnetic field
strength
Magnetic
χ
Scalar
-
-
M = χH
susceptibility
Relative magnetic
µr
Scalar
-
-
B = µ0 µr H
permeability
Magnetic permeability
µ
Scalar
[MLT–2 A–2]
T m A–1
µ = µ0 µr
N A–2
B = µ H
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 17 :
 Physics
152
5.
There exists a perfect diamagnet, namely, a superconductor. This is a
metal at very low temperatures. In this case χ = –1, µr = 0, µ = 0. The
external magnetic field is totally expelled. Interestingly, this material is
also a perfect conductor. However, there exists no classical theory which
ties these two properties together. A quantum-mechanical theory by
Bardeen, Cooper, and Schrieffer (BCS theory) explains these effects. The
BCS theory was proposed in1957 and was eventually recognised by a Nobel
Prize in physics in 1970.
6.
Diamagnetism is universal. It is present in all materials. But it
is weak and hard to detect if the substance is para- or ferromagnetic.
7.
We have classified materials as diamagnetic, paramagnetic, and
ferromagnetic. However, there exist additional types of magnetic material
such as ferrimagnetic, anti-ferromagnetic, spin glass, etc. with properties
which are exotic and mysterious.
EXERCISES
5.1
A short bar magnet placed with its axis at 30° with a uniform external
magnetic field of 0.25 T experiences a torque of magnitude equal to
4.5 × 10–2 J. What is the magnitude of magnetic moment of the magnet?
5.2
A short bar magnet of magnetic moment m = 0.32 JT –1 is placed in a
uniform magnetic field of 0.15 T. If the bar is free to rotate in the
plane of the field, which orientation would correspond to its (a) stable,
and (b) unstable equilibrium? What is the potential energy of the
magnet in each case?
5.3
A closely wound solenoid of 800 turns and area of cross section
2.5 × 10–4 m2 carries a current of 3.0 A. Explain the sense in which
the solenoid acts like a bar magnet. What is its associated magnetic
moment?
5.4
If the solenoid in Exercise 5.5 is free to turn about the vertical
direction and a uniform horizontal magnetic field of 0.25 T is applied,
what is the magnitude of torque on the solenoid when its axis makes
an angle of 30° with the direction of applied field?
5.5
A bar magnet of magnetic moment 1.5 J T –1 lies aligned with the
direction of a uniform magnetic field of 0.22 T.
(a) What is the amount of work required by an external torque to
turn the magnet so as to align its magnetic moment: (i) normal
to the field direction, (ii) opposite to the field direction?
(b) What is the torque on the magnet in cases (i) and (ii)?
5.6
A closely wound solenoid of 2000 turns and area of cross-section
1.6 × 10 –4 m2,  carrying a current of 4.0 A, is suspended through its
centre allowing it to turn in a horizontal plane.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 18 :
 153
Magnetism and
Matter
(a) What is the magnetic moment associated with the solenoid?
(b) What is the force and torque on the solenoid if a uniform
horizontal magnetic field of 7.5 × 10–2 T is set up at an angle of
30° with the axis of the solenoid?
5.7
A short bar magnet has a magnetic moment of 0.48 J T –1. Give the
direction and magnitude of the magnetic field produced by the magnet
at a distance of 10 cm from the centre of the magnet on (a) the axis,
(b) the equatorial lines (normal bisector) of the magnet.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 1 :
 Physics
154
6.1  INTRODUCTION
Electricity and magnetism were considered separate and unrelated
phenomena for a long time. In the early decades of the nineteenth century,
experiments on electric current by Oersted, Ampere and a few others
established the fact that electricity and magnetism are inter-related. They
found that moving electric charges produce magnetic fields. For example,
an electric current deflects a magnetic compass needle placed in its vicinity.
This naturally raises the questions like: Is the converse effect possible?
Can moving magnets produce electric currents? Does the nature permit
such a relation between electricity and magnetism? The answer is
resounding yes! The experiments of Michael Faraday in England and
Joseph Henry in USA, conducted around 1830, demonstrated
conclusively that electric currents were induced in closed coils when
subjected to changing magnetic fields. In this chapter, we will study the
phenomena associated with changing magnetic fields and understand
the underlying principles. The phenomenon in which electric current is
generated by varying magnetic fields is appropriately called
electromagnetic induction.
When Faraday first made public his discovery that relative motion
between a bar magnet and a wire loop produced a small current in the
latter, he was asked, “What is the use of it?” His reply was: “What is the
use of a new born baby?” The phenomenon of electromagnetic induction
Chapter Six
ELECTROMAGNETIC
INDUCTION
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 2 :
 Electromagnetic
Induction
155
is not merely of theoretical or academic interest but also
of practical utility. Imagine a world where there is no
electricity – no electric lights, no trains, no telephones and
no personal computers. The pioneering experiments of
Faraday and Henry have led directly to the development
of modern day generators and transformers. Today’s
civilisation owes its progress to a great extent to the
discovery of electromagnetic induction.
6.2 THE EXPERIMENTS OF FARADAY AND
HENRY
The discovery and understanding of electromagnetic
induction are based on a long series of experiments carried
out by Faraday and Henry. We shall now describe some
of these experiments.
Experiment 6.1
Figure 6.1 shows a coil C1* connected to a galvanometer
G. When the North-pole of a bar magnet is pushed
towards the coil, the pointer in the galvanometer deflects,
indicating  the presence of electric  current in the coil. The
deflection lasts as long as the bar magnet is in motion.
The galvanometer does not show any deflection when the
magnet is held stationary. When the magnet is pulled
away from the coil, the galvanometer shows deflection in
the opposite direction, which indicates reversal of the
current’s direction. Moreover, when the South-pole of
the bar magnet is moved towards or away from the
coil, the deflections in the galvanometer are opposite
to that observed with the North-pole for similar
movements. Further, the deflection (and hence current)
is found to be larger when the magnet is pushed
towards or pulled away from the coil faster. Instead,
when the bar magnet is held fixed and the coil C1 is
moved towards or away from the magnet, the same
effects are observed. It shows that it is the relative
motion between the magnet and the coil that is
responsible for generation (induction) of electric
current in the coil.
Experiment 6.2
In Fig. 6.2 the bar magnet is replaced by a second coil
C2 connected to a battery. The steady current in the
coil C2 produces a steady magnetic field. As coil C2 is
*
Wherever the term ‘coil’ or ‘loop’ is used, it is assumed that they are made up of
conducting material and are prepared using wires which are coated with insulating
material.
FIGURE 6.1 When the bar magnet is
pushed towards the coil, the pointer in
the galvanometer G deflects.
Josheph Henry [1797 –
1878] American experimental
physicist, 
professor 
at
Princeton University and first
director of the Smithsonian
Institution. He made important
improvements in electro-
magnets by winding coils of
insulated wire around iron
pole pieces and  invented an
electromagnetic motor and a
new, efficient telegraph. He
discoverd self-induction and
investigated how currents in
one circuit induce currents in
another.
JOSEPH HENRY (1797 – 1878)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 3 :
 Physics
156
moved towards the coil C1, the galvanometer shows a
deflection. This indicates that electric current is induced in
coil C1. When C2 is moved away, the galvanometer shows a
deflection again, but this time in the opposite direction. The
deflection lasts as long as coil C2 is in motion. When the coil
C2 is held fixed and C1 is moved, the same effects are observed.
Again, it is the relative motion between the coils that induces
the electric current.
Experiment 6.3
The above two experiments involved relative motion between
a magnet and a coil and between two coils, respectively.
Through another experiment, Faraday showed that this
relative motion is not an absolute requirement. Figure 6.3
shows two coils C1 and C2 held stationary. Coil C1 is connected
to galvanometer G while the second coil C2 is connected to a
battery through a tapping key K.
FIGURE 6.2  Current is
induced in coil C1 due to motion
of the current carrying coil C2.
FIGURE 6.3 Experimental set-up for Experiment 6.3.
It is observed that the galvanometer shows a momentary deflection
when the tapping key K is pressed. The pointer in the galvanometer returns
to zero immediately. If the key is held pressed continuously, there is no
deflection in the galvanometer. When the key is released, a momentory
deflection is observed again, but in the opposite direction. It is also observed
that the deflection increases dramatically when an iron rod is inserted
into the coils along their axis.
6.3  MAGNETIC FLUX
Faraday’s great insight lay in discovering a simple mathematical relation
to explain the series of experiments he carried out on electromagnetic
induction. However, before we state and appreciate his laws, we must get
familiar with the notion of magnetic flux, F B. Magnetic flux is defined in
the same way as electric flux is defined in Chapter 1. Magnetic flux through
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 4 :
 Electromagnetic
Induction
157
a plane of area A placed in a uniform magnetic field B (Fig. 6.4) can
be written as
F B  = B . A = BA cos q
(6.1)
where q   is angle between B and A. The notion of the area as a vector
has been discussed earlier in Chapter 1. Equation (6.1) can be
extended to curved surfaces and nonuniform fields.
If the magnetic field has different magnitudes and directions at
various parts of a surface as shown in Fig. 6.5, then the magnetic
flux through the surface is given by
1
1
2
2
d
d
Φ =
+
+
B
A
B
A
.
.
B
... =
B
A
.
i
i
d
all∑
(6.2)
where ‘all’ stands for summation over all the area elements dAi
comprising the surface and Bi is the magnetic field at the area element
dAi. The SI unit of magnetic flux is weber (Wb) or tesla meter
squared (T m2). Magnetic flux is a scalar quantity.
6.4  FARADAY’S LAW OF INDUCTION
From the experimental observations, Faraday arrived at a
conclusion that an emf is induced in a coil when magnetic flux
through the coil changes with time. Experimental observations
discussed in Section 6.2 can be explained using this concept.
The motion of a magnet towards or away from coil C1 in
Experiment 6.1 and moving a current-carrying coil C2 towards
or away from coil C1 in Experiment 6.2, change the magnetic
flux associated with coil C1.  The change in magnetic flux induces
emf in coil C1. It was this induced emf which caused electric
current to flow in coil C1 and through the galvanometer. A
plausible explanation for the observations of Experiment 6.3 is
as follows: When the tapping key K is pressed, the current in
coil C2 (and the resulting magnetic field) rises from zero to a
maximum value in a short time. Consequently, the magnetic
flux through the neighbouring coil C1 also increases. It is the change in
magnetic flux through coil C1 that produces an induced emf in coil C1.
When the key is held pressed, current in coil C2 is constant. Therefore,
there is no change in the magnetic flux through coil C1 and the current in
coil C1 drops to zero. When the key is released, the current in C2 and the
resulting magnetic field decreases from the maximum value to zero in a
short time. This results in a decrease in magnetic flux through coil C1
and hence again induces an electric current in coil C1*. The common
point in all these observations is that the time rate of change of magnetic
flux through a circuit induces emf in it. Faraday stated experimental
observations in the form of a law called Faraday’s law of electromagnetic
induction. The law is stated below.
FIGURE 6.4 A plane of
surface area A placed in a
uniform magnetic field B.
FIGURE 6.5 Magnetic field Bi
at the ith area element. dAi
represents area vector of the
ith area element.
*
Note that sensitive electrical instruments in the vicinity of an electromagnet
can be damaged due to the induced emfs (and the resulting currents)  when the
electromagnet is turned on or off.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 5 :
 Physics
158
 EXAMPLE 6.1
The magnitude of the induced emf in a circuit is equal
to the time rate of change of magnetic flux through the
circuit.
Mathematically, the induced emf is given by
d
– d
B
t
Φ
ε =
(6.3)
The negative sign indicates the direction of e  and hence
the direction of current in a closed loop. This will be
discussed in detail in the next section.
In the case of a closely wound coil of N turns, change
of flux associated with each turn, is the same. Therefore,
the expression for the total induced emf is given by
d
–
d
B
N
t
Φ
ε =
(6.4)
The induced emf can be increased by increasing the
number of turns N of a closed coil.
From Eqs. (6.1) and (6.2), we see that the flux can be
varied by changing any one or more of the terms B, A and
q. In Experiments 6.1 and 6.2 in Section 6.2, the flux is
changed by varying B. The flux can also be altered by
changing the shape of a coil (that is, by shrinking it or
stretching it) in a magnetic field, or rotating a coil in a
magnetic field such that the angle q  between B and A
changes. In these cases too, an emf is induced in the
respective coils.
Example 6.1  Consider Experiment 6.2. (a) What would you do to obtain
a large deflection of the galvanometer? (b) How would you demonstrate
the presence of an induced current in the absence of a galvanometer?
Solution
(a) To obtain a large deflection, one or more of the following steps can
be taken:  (i) Use a rod made of soft iron inside the coil C2, (ii) Connect
the coil to a powerful battery, and (iii) Move the arrangement rapidly
towards the test coil C1.
(b) Replace the galvanometer by a small bulb, the kind one finds in a
small torch light. The relative motion between the two coils will cause
the bulb to glow and thus demonstrate the presence of an induced
current.
In experimental physics one must learn to innovate. Michael Faraday
who is ranked as one of the best experimentalists ever, was legendary
for his innovative skills.
Example 6.2 A square loop of side 10 cm and resistance 0.5 W is
placed vertically in the east-west  plane. A uniform magnetic field of
0.10 T is set up across the plane in the north-east direction. The
magnetic field is decreased to zero in 0.70 s at a steady rate. Determine
the magnitudes of induced emf and current during this time-interval.
Michael Faraday  [1791–
1867] 
Faraday 
made
numerous contributions to
science, viz., the discovery
of 
electromagnetic
induction, the laws of
electrolysis, benzene, and
the fact that the plane of
polarisation is rotated in an
electric field. He is also
credited with the invention
of the electric motor, the
electric generator and the
transformer. He is widely
regarded as the greatest
experimental scientist of
the nineteenth century.
MICHAEL FARADAY (1791–1867)
 EXAMPLE 6.2
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 6 :
 Electromagnetic
Induction
159
 EXAMPLE 6.2
Solution The angle q made by the area vector of the coil with the
magnetic field is 45°. From Eq. (6.1), the initial magnetic flux is
F = BA cos q
–2
0.1
10
Wb
2
×
=
Final flux, Fmin = 0
The change in flux is brought about in 0.70 s. From Eq. (6.3), the
magnitude of the induced emf is given by
(
)
– 0
B
t
t
Φ
Φ
ε
∆
=
=
∆
∆
 
–3
10
=
1.0 mV
2
0.7
=
×
And the magnitude of the current is
–3
10
V
2 mA
0.5
I
R
ε
=
=
=
Ω
Note that the earth’s magnetic field also produces a flux through the
loop. But it is a steady field (which does not change within the time
span of the experiment) and hence does not induce any emf.
Example 6.3
A circular coil of radius 10 cm, 500 turns and resistance 2 W is placed
with its plane perpendicular to the horizontal component of the earth’s
magnetic field. It is rotated about its vertical diameter through 180°
in 0.25 s. Estimate the magnitudes of the emf and current induced in
the coil. Horizontal component of the earth’s magnetic field at the
place is 3.0 × 10–5 T.
Solution
Initial flux through the coil,
FB (initial) = BA cos q
= 3.0 × 10–5 × (p ×10–2) × cos 0°
= 3p × 10–7 Wb
Final flux after the rotation,
FB (final)    = 3.0 × 10–5 × (p ×10–2) × cos 180°
= –3p × 10–7 Wb
Therefore, estimated value of the induced emf is,
N
t
Φ
ε
∆
=
∆
   = 500 × (6p × 10–7)/0.25
   = 3.8  × 10–3  V
I = e/R = 1.9 × 10–3 A
Note that the magnitudes of e and I are the estimated values. Their
instantaneous values are different and depend upon the speed of
rotation at the particular instant.
 EXAMPLE 6.3
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 7 :
 Physics
160
6.5  LENZ’S LAW AND CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
In 1834, German physicist Heinrich Friedrich Lenz (1804-1865) deduced
a rule, known as Lenz’s law which gives the polarity of the induced emf
in a clear and concise fashion. The statement of the law is:
The polarity of induced emf is such that it tends to produce a current
which opposes the change in magnetic flux that produced it.
The negative sign shown in Eq. (6.3) represents this effect. We can
understand Lenz’s law by examining Experiment 6.1 in Section 6.2.1. In
Fig. 6.1, we see that the North-pole of a bar magnet is being pushed
towards the closed coil. As the North-pole of the bar magnet moves towards
the coil, the magnetic flux through the coil increases. Hence current is
induced in the coil in such a direction that it opposes the increase in flux.
This is possible only if the current in the coil is in a counter-clockwise
direction with respect to an observer situated on the side of the magnet.
Note that magnetic moment associated with this current has North polarity
towards the North-pole of the approaching magnet. Similarly, if the North-
pole of the magnet is being withdrawn from the coil, the magnetic flux
through the coil will decrease. To counter this decrease in magnetic flux,
the induced current in the coil flows in clockwise direction and its South-
pole faces the receding North-pole of the bar magnet. This would result in
an attractive force which opposes the motion of the magnet and the
corresponding decrease in flux.
What will happen if an open circuit is used in place of the closed loop
in the above example? In this case too, an emf is induced across the open
ends of the circuit. The direction of the induced emf can be found
using Lenz’s law. Consider Figs. 6.6 (a) and (b). They provide an easier
way to understand the direction of induced currents. Note that the
direction shown by 
 and 
 indicate the directions of the induced
currents.
A little reflection on this matter should convince us on the
correctness of Lenz’s law. Suppose that the induced current was in
the direction opposite to the one depicted in Fig. 6.6(a). In that case,
the South-pole due to the induced current will face the approaching
North-pole of the magnet. The bar magnet will then be attracted
towards the coil at an ever increasing acceleration. A gentle push on
the magnet will initiate the process and its velocity and kinetic energy
will continuously increase without expending any energy. If this can
happen, one could construct a perpetual-motion machine by a
suitable arrangement. This violates the law of conservation of energy
and hence can not happen.
Now consider the correct case shown in Fig. 6.6(a). In this situation,
the bar magnet experiences a repulsive force due to the induced
current. Therefore, a person has to do work in moving the magnet.
Where does the energy spent by the person go? This energy is
dissipated by Joule heating produced by the induced current.
FIGURE 6.6
Illustration of
Lenz’s law.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 8 :
 Electromagnetic
Induction
161
 EXAMPLE 6.4
Example 6.4
Figure 6.7 shows planar loops of different shapes moving out of or
into a region of a magnetic field which is directed normal to the plane
of the loop away from the reader. Determine the direction of induced
current in each loop using Lenz’s law.
FIGURE 6.7
Solution
(i)
The magnetic flux through the rectangular loop abcd increases,
due to the motion of the loop into the region of magnetic field, The
induced current must flow along the path bcdab so that it opposes
the increasing flux.
(ii) Due to the outward motion, magnetic flux through the triangular
loop abc decreases due to which the induced current flows along
bacb, so as to oppose the change in flux.
(iii) As the magnetic flux decreases due to motion of the irregular
shaped loop abcd out of the region of magnetic field, the induced
current flows along cdabc, so as to oppose change in flux.
Note that there are no induced current as long as the loops are
completely inside or outside the region of the magnetic field.
Example 6.5
(a) A closed loop is held stationary in the magnetic field between the
north and south poles of two permanent magnets held fixed. Can
we hope to generate current in the loop by using very strong
magnets?
(b) A closed loop moves normal to the constant electric field between
the plates of a large capacitor. Is a current induced in the loop
(i) when it is wholly inside the region between the capacitor plates
(ii) when it is partially outside the plates of the capacitor? The
electric field is normal to the plane of the loop.
(c) A rectangular loop and a circular loop are moving out of a uniform
magnetic field region (Fig. 6.8) to a field-free region with a constant
velocity v. In which loop do you expect the induced emf to be
constant during the passage out of the field region?  The field is
normal to the loops.
 EXAMPLE 6.5
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 9 :
 Physics
162
 EXAMPLE 6.5
FIGURE 6.8
(d) Predict the polarity of the capacitor in the situation described by
Fig. 6.9.
FIGURE 6.9
Solution
(a) No. However strong the magnet may be, current can be induced
only by changing the magnetic flux through the loop.
(b) No current is induced in either case. Current can not be induced
by changing the electric flux.
(c) The induced emf is expected to be constant only in the case of the
rectangular loop. In the case of circular loop, the rate of change of
area of the loop during its passage out of the field region is not
constant, hence induced emf will vary accordingly.
(d) The polarity of plate ‘A’ will be positive with respect to plate ‘B’ in
the capacitor.
6.6  MOTIONAL ELECTROMOTIVE FORCE
Let us consider a straight conductor moving in a uniform and time-
independent magnetic field.  Figure 6.10 shows a rectangular conductor
PQRS in which the conductor PQ is free to move. The rod PQ is moved
towards the left with a constant velocity v as
shown in the figure. Assume that there is no
loss of energy due to friction. PQRS forms a
closed circuit enclosing an area that changes
as PQ moves. It is placed in a uniform magnetic
field B which is perpendicular to the plane of
this system. If the length RQ = x and RS = l, the
magnetic flux FB enclosed  by the loop PQRS
will be
FB = Blx
Since x is changing with time, the rate of change
of flux FB will induce an emf given by:
(
)
– d
d
–
d
d
B
Blx
t
t
Φ
ε =
=
   = 
d
–
d
x
Bl
Blv
t =
(6.5)
FIGURE 6.10  The arm PQ is moved to the left
side, thus decreasing the area of the
rectangular loop. This movement
induces a current I as shown.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 10 :
 Electromagnetic
Induction
163
where we have used dx/dt = –v  which is the speed of the conductor PQ.
The induced emf Blv is called motional emf. Thus, we are able to produce
induced emf by moving a conductor instead of varying the magnetic field,
that is, by changing the magnetic flux enclosed by the circuit.
It is also possible to explain the motional emf expression in Eq. (6.5)
by invoking the Lorentz force acting on the free charge carriers of conductor
PQ. Consider any arbitrary charge q in the conductor PQ. When the rod
moves with speed v, the charge will also be moving with speed v in the
magnetic field B. The Lorentz force on this charge is qvB in magnitude,
and its direction is towards Q. All charges experience the same force, in
magnitude and direction, irrespective of their position in the rod PQ.
The work done in moving the charge from P to Q is,
W = qvBl
Since emf is the work done per unit charge,
W
q
ε =
    = Blv
This equation gives emf induced across the rod PQ and is identical
to Eq. (6.5). We stress that our presentation is not wholly rigorous. But
it does help us to understand the basis of Faraday’s law when
the conductor is moving in a uniform and time-independent
magnetic field.
On the other hand, it is not obvious how an emf is induced when a
conductor is stationary and the magnetic field is changing – a fact which
Faraday verified by numerous experiments. In the case of a stationary
conductor, the force on its charges is given by
F = q (E + v ´´´´´ B) = qE
(6.6)
since v = 0. Thus, any force on the charge must arise from the electric
field term E alone. Therefore, to explain the existence of induced emf or
induced current, we must assume that a time-varying magnetic field
generates an electric field. However, we hasten to add that electric fields
produced by static electric charges have properties different from those
produced by time-varying magnetic fields. In Chapter 4, we learnt that
charges in motion (current) can exert force/torque on a stationary magnet.
Conversely, a bar magnet in motion (or more generally, a changing
magnetic field) can exert a force on the stationary charge. This is the
fundamental significance of the Faraday’s discovery. Electricity and
magnetism are related.
Example 6.6  A metallic rod of 1 m length is rotated with a frequency
of 50 rev/s, with one end hinged at the centre and the other end at the
circumference of a circular metallic ring of radius 1 m, about an axis
passing through the centre and perpendicular to the plane of the ring
(Fig. 6.11). A constant and uniform magnetic field of 1 T parallel to the
axis is present everywhere. What is the emf between the centre and
the metallic ring?
 EXAMPLE 6.6
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 11 :
 Physics
164
 EXAMPLE 6.6
FIGURE 6.11
Solution
Method I
As the rod is rotated, free electrons in the rod move towards the outer
end due to Lorentz force and get distributed over the ring. Thus, the
resulting separation of charges produces an emf across the ends of
the rod. At a certain value of emf, there is no more flow of electrons
and a steady state is reached. Using Eq. (6.5), the magnitude of the
emf generated across a length dr of the rod as it moves at right angles
to the magnetic field is given by
d
d
Bv
r
ε =
. Hence,
ε
ε
=
= ∫
∫
d
d
Bv
r
R
0
 =
=
∫B
r
r
B
R
R
ω
ω
d
2
0
2
Note that we have used v = w r. This gives
e 
2
1
1.0
2
50
(1 )
2
=
×
×
π ×
×
= 157 V
Method II
To calculate the emf, we can imagine a closed loop OPQ in which
point O and P are connected with a resistor R and OQ is the rotating
rod. The potential difference across the resistor is then equal to the
induced emf and equals B × (rate of change of area of loop). If q is the
angle between the rod and the radius of the circle at P at time t, the
area of the sector OPQ is given by
2
2
1
2
2
R
R
θ
θ
π
×
=
π
where R is the radius of the circle. Hence, the induced emf is
e = B
t
R
×




d
d
1
2
2θ  = 
2
2
1
d
2
d
2
θ
ω
= B R
BR
t
[Note: 
d
2
dt
θ
ω
ν
=
=
π
]
This expression is identical to the expression obtained by Method I
and we get the same value of e.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 12 :
 Electromagnetic
Induction
165
 EXAMPLE 6.7
Example 6.7
A wheel with 10 metallic spokes each 0.5 m long is rotated with a
speed of 120 rev/min in a plane normal to the horizontal component
of earth’s magnetic field HE at a place. If HE = 0.4 G at the place, what
is the induced emf between the axle and the rim of the wheel? Note
that 1 G = 10–4 T.
Solution
Induced emf = (1/2) ω B R2
= (1/2) × 4π × 0.4 × 10–4 × (0.5)2
= 6.28 × 10–5 V
The number of spokes is immaterial because the emf’s across the
spokes are in parallel.
6.7  INDUCTANCE
An electric current can be induced in a coil by flux change produced by
another coil in its vicinity or flux change produced by the same coil. These
two situations are described separately in the next two sub-sections.
However, in both the cases, the flux through a coil is proportional to the
current. That is,  ΦB α I.
Further, if the geometry of the coil does not vary with time then,
d
d
d
d
B
I
t
t
Φ
∝
For a closely wound coil of N turns, the same magnetic flux is linked
with all the turns. When the flux ΦB through the coil changes, each turn
contributes to the induced emf. Therefore, a term called flux linkage is
used which is equal to NΦB for a closely wound coil and in such a case
NΦB∝ I
The constant of proportionality, in this relation, is called inductance.
We shall see that inductance depends only on the geometry of the coil
and intrinsic material properties. This aspect is akin to capacitance which
for a parallel plate capacitor depends on the plate area and plate separation
(geometry) and the dielectric constant K of the intervening medium
(intrinsic material property).
Inductance is a scalar quantity. It has the dimensions of [M L2 T–2 A–2]
given by the dimensions of flux divided by the dimensions of current. The
SI unit of inductance is henry and is denoted by H. It is named in honour
of Joseph Henry who discovered electromagnetic induction in USA,
independently of Faraday in England.
6.7.1  Mutual inductance
Consider Fig. 6.12 which shows two long co-axial solenoids each of length
l. We denote the radius of the inner solenoid S1
 by r1 and the number of
turns per unit length by n1. The corresponding quantities for the outer
solenoid S2 are r2 and n2, respectively. Let N1 and N2 be the total number
of turns of coils S1 and S2, respectively.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 13 :
 Physics
166
When a current I2 is set up through S2, it in turn sets
up a magnetic flux through S1. Let us denote it by Φ1.
The corresponding flux linkage with  solenoid S1 is
N1
1
12 2
M
I
Φ =
(6.7)
M12 is called the mutual inductance of solenoid S1 with
respect to solenoid S2. It is also referred to as the
coefficient of mutual induction.
For these simple co-axial solenoids it is possible to
calculate M12. The magnetic field due to the current I2 in
S2 is µ0n2I2. The resulting flux linkage with coil S1 is,
(
) (
) (
)
2
1
1
1
1
0
2 2
N
n l
r
n I
Φ
µ
=
π
         
2
0
1
2
1
2
n n
r l I
µ
=
π
(6.8)
where n1l is the total number of turns in solenoid S1.
Thus, from Eq. (6.7) and Eq. (6.8),
M12 = µ0n1n2πr 2
1l
(6.9)
Note that we neglected the edge effects and considered
the magnetic field µ0n2I2 to be uniform throughout the
length and width of the solenoid S2. This is a good approximation keeping
in mind that the solenoid is long, implying l  >> r2.
We now consider the reverse case. A current I1 is passed through the
solenoid S1 and the flux linkage with coil S2 is,
N2Φ2 = M21 I1
(6.10)
M21 is called the mutual inductance of solenoid S2 with respect to
solenoid S1.
The flux due to the current I1 in S1 can be assumed to be confined
solely inside S1 since the solenoids are very long. Thus, flux linkage with
solenoid S2 is
(
) (
) (
)
2
2
2
2
1
0
1 1
N
n l
r
n I
Φ
µ
=
π
where n2l is the total number of turns of S2. From Eq. (6.10),
M21 = µ0n1n2πr 2
1l
(6.11)
Using Eq. (6.9) and Eq. (6.10), we get
M12 = M21= M (say)
(6.12)
We have demonstrated this equality for long co-axial solenoids.
However, the relation is far more general. Note that if the inner solenoid
was much shorter than (and placed well inside) the outer solenoid, then
we could still have calculated the flux linkage N1Φ1 because the inner
solenoid is effectively immersed in a uniform magnetic field due to the
outer solenoid. In this case, the calculation of M12 would be easy. However,
it would be extremely difficult to calculate the flux linkage with the outer
solenoid as the magnetic field due to the inner solenoid would vary across
the length as well as cross section of the outer solenoid. Therefore, the
calculation of M21 would also be extremely difficult in this case. The
equality M12=M21 is very useful in such situations.
FIGURE 6.12 Two long co-axial
solenoids of same
length l.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 14 :
 Electromagnetic
Induction
167
 EXAMPLE 6.8
We explained the above example with air as the medium within the
solenoids. Instead, if a medium of relative permeability µr had been present,
the mutual inductance would be
M =µr µ0 n1n2π r2
1 l
It is also important to know that the mutual inductance of a pair of
coils, solenoids, etc., depends on their separation as well as their relative
orientation.
Example 6.8 Two concentric circular coils, one of small radius r1 and
the other of large radius r2, such that r1 << r2,  are placed co-axially
with centres coinciding. Obtain the mutual inductance of the
arrangement.
Solution  Let a current I2 flow through the outer circular coil. The
field at the centre of the coil is B2 = µ0I2 / 2r2. Since the other
co-axially placed coil has a very small radius, B2 may be considered
constant over its cross-sectional area. Hence,
Φ1 = πr 2
1B2
     
2
0
1
2
2
2
r
I
r
µ π
=
     = M12 I2
Thus,
2
0
1
12
2
2
r
M
r
µ π
=
From Eq. (6.12)
2
0
1
12
21
2
2
r
M
M
r
µ π
=
=
Note that we calculated M12 from an approximate value of Φ1, assuming
the magnetic field B2 to be uniform over the area π r1
2. However, we
can accept this value because r1 << r2.
Now, let us recollect Experiment 6.3 in Section 6.2. In that experiment,
emf is induced in coil C1 wherever there was any change in current through
coil C2. Let Φ1 be the flux through coil C1 (say of N1 turns) when current in
coil C2 is I2.
Then, from Eq. (6.7), we have
N1Φ1 = MI2
For currents varrying with time,
(
)
(
)
1
1
2
d
d
d
d
N
MI
t
t
Φ
=
Since induced emf in coil C1 is given by
(
)
1
1
d
–
d
N
t
Φ
ε1 =
We get,
2
d
–
d
I
M
t
ε1 =
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 15 :
 Physics
168
It shows that varying current in a coil can induce emf in a neighbouring
coil. The magnitude of the induced emf depends upon the rate of change
of current and mutual inductance of the two coils.
6.7.2  Self-inductance
In the previous sub-section, we considered the flux in one solenoid due
to the current in the other.  It is also possible that emf is induced in a
single isolated coil due to change of flux through the coil by means of
varying the current through the same coil. This phenomenon is called
self-induction. In this case, flux linkage through a coil of N turns is
proportional to the current through the coil and is expressed as
B
N
I
Φ ∝
B
L
N
I
Φ
=
(6.13)
where constant of proportionality L is called self-inductance of the coil. It
is also called the coefficient of self-induction of the coil. When the current
is varied, the flux linked with the coil also changes and an emf is induced
in the coil. Using Eq. (6.13), the induced emf is given by
(
)
B
d
–
d
N
t
Φ
ε =
d
–
d
I
L
t
ε =
(6.14)
Thus, the self-induced emf always opposes any change  (increase or
decrease) of current in the coil.
It is possible to calculate the self-inductance for circuits with simple
geometries. Let us calculate the self-inductance of a long solenoid of cross-
sectional area A and length l, having n turns per unit length. The magnetic
field due to a current I flowing in the solenoid is B = µ0 n I  (neglecting edge
effects, as before). The total flux linked with the solenoid is
(
)(
)( )
0
B
N
nl
n I
A
Φ
µ
=
I
Al
n2
0
µ
=
where nl is the total number of turns. Thus, the self-inductance is,
L
I
Β
ΝΦ
=
   
2
0n Al
µ
=
(6.15)
If we fill the inside of the solenoid with a material of relative permeability
µr (for example soft iron, which has a high value of relative permeability),
then,
2
0
r
L
n Al
µ µ
=
(6.16)
The self-inductance of the coil depends on its geometry and on the
permeability of the medium.
The self-induced emf is also called the back emf as it opposes any
change in the current in a circuit. Physically, the self-inductance plays
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 16 :
 Electromagnetic
Induction
169
the role of inertia. It is the electromagnetic analogue of mass in mechanics.
So, work needs to be done against the back emf (ε) in establishing the
current. This work done is stored as magnetic potential energy. For the
current I at an instant in a circuit, the rate of work done is
d
d
W
I
t
ε
=
If we ignore the resistive losses and consider only inductive effect,
then using Eq. (6.14),
d
d
d
d
W
I
L I
t
t
=
Total amount of work done in establishing the current I is
W
W
L I
I
I
=
=
∫
∫
d
d
0
Thus, the energy required to build up the current I is,
2
1
2
W
LI
=
(6.17)
This expression reminds us of mv 2/2 for the (mechanical) kinetic energy
of a particle of mass m, and shows that L is analogous to m (i.e., L is
electrical inertia and opposes growth and decay of current in the circuit).
Consider the general case of currents flowing simultaneously in two
nearby coils. The flux linked with one coil will be the sum of two fluxes
which exist independently. Equation (6.7) would be modified into
N1
1
11
1
12
2
M
I
M
I
Φ =
+
where M11 represents inductance due to the same coil.
Therefore, using Faraday’s law,
1
2
1
11
12
d
d
d
d
I
I
M
M
t
t
ε = −
−
M11 is the self-inductance and is written as L1. Therefore,
1
2
1
1
12
d
d
d
d
I
I
L
M
t
t
ε = −
−
Example 6.9 (a) Obtain the expression for the magnetic energy stored
in a solenoid in terms of magnetic field B, area A and length l of the
solenoid. (b) How does this magnetic energy compare with the
electrostatic energy stored in a capacitor?
Solution
(a)
From Eq. (6.17), the magnetic energy is
2
1
2
B
U
LI
=
=




=
(
)
1
2
2
L
B
n
nI
µ
µ
0
0
B
since
 
for a solenoid
,
 EXAMPLE 6.9
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 17 :
 Physics
170
 EXAMPLE 6.9
=




1
2
0
2
0
2
(
)
µ
µ
n Al
B
n
        [from Eq. (6.15)]
2
0
1
2
B Al
µ
=
(b)
The magnetic energy per unit volume is,
B
B
U
u
V
=
            (where V is volume that contains flux)
      
B
U
Al
=
      
2
0
2
B
µ
=
(6.18)
We have already obtained the relation for the electrostatic energy
stored per unit volume in a parallel plate capacitor (refer to Chapter 2,
Eq. 2.73),
2
0
1
2
u
E
Ε
ε
=
(2.73)
In both the cases energy is proportional to the square of the field
strength. Equations (6.18) and (2.73) have been derived for special
cases: a solenoid and a parallel plate capacitor, respectively. But they
are general and valid for any region of space in which a magnetic field
or/and an electric field exist.
FIGURE 6.13 AC Generator
Interactive animation on ac generator:
http://micro.magnet.fsu.edu/electromag/java/generator/ac.html
6.8  AC GENERATOR
The phenomenon of electromagnetic induction
has been technologically exploited in many ways.
An exceptionally important application is the
generation of alternating currents (ac). The
modern ac generator with a typical output
capacity of 100 MW is a highly evolved machine.
In this section, we shall describe the basic
principles behind this machine. The Yugoslav
inventor Nicola Tesla is credited with the
development of the machine. As was pointed out
in Section 6.3, one method to induce an emf or
current in a loop is through a change in the
loop’s orientation or a change in its effective area.
As the coil rotates in a magnetic field B, the
effective area of the loop (the face perpendicular
to the field) is A cos q, where q is the angle
between A and B. This method of producing a
flux change is the principle of operation of a
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 18 :
 Electromagnetic
Induction
171
simple ac generator. An ac generator converts mechanical energy into
electrical energy.
The basic elements of an ac generator are shown in Fig. 6.13. It consists
of a coil mounted on a rotor shaft. The axis of rotation of the coil is
perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic field. The coil (called
armature) is mechanically rotated in the  uniform magnetic field by some
external means. The rotation of the coil causes the magnetic flux through
it to change, so an emf is induced in the coil. The ends of the
coil are connected to an external circuit by means of slip rings
and brushes.
When the coil is rotated with a constant angular speed w, the angle q
between the magnetic field vector B and the area vector A of the coil at any
instant t is q  = wt (assuming q = 0° at t = 0). As a result, the effective area
of the coil exposed to the magnetic field lines changes with time, and from
Eq. (6.1), the flux at any time t is
FB = BA cos q = BA cos wt
From Faraday’s law, the induced emf for the rotating coil of N turns
is then,
d
d
–
–
(cos
)
dt
d
B
N
NBA
t
t
Φ
ε
ω
=
=
Thus, the instantaneous value of the emf is
ε
ω
ω
= NBA
sin
t
(6.19)
where NBAw is the maximum value of the emf, which occurs when
sin wt = ±1. If we denote NBAw as e0, then
e = e0 sin wt
(6.20)
Since the value of the sine fuction varies between +1 and –1, the sign, or
polarity of the emf changes with time. Note from Fig. 6.14 that the emf
has its extremum value when q = 90° or q = 270°, as the change of flux is
greatest at these points.
The direction of the current changes periodically and therefore the current
is called alternating current (ac). Since w = 2pn, Eq (6.20) can be written as
e = e0sin 2p n t
(6.21)
where n is the frequency of revolution of the generator’s coil.
Note that Eq. (6.20) and (6.21) give the instantaneous value of the emf
and e varies between +e0 and –e0 periodically. We shall learn how to
determine the time-averaged value for the alternating voltage and current
in the next chapter.
In commercial generators, the mechanical energy required for
rotation of the armature is provided by water falling from a height, for
example, from dams. These are called hydro-electric generators.
Alternatively, water is heated to produce steam using coal or other
sources. The steam at high pressure produces the rotation of the
armature. These are called thermal generators. Instead of coal, if a
nuclear fuel is used, we get nuclear power generators. Modern day
generators produce electric power as high as 500 MW, i.e., one can light
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 19 :
 Physics
172
 EXAMPLE 6.10
Example 6.10 Kamla peddles a stationary bicycle. The pedals of the
bicycle are attached to a 100 turn coil of area 0.10 m2. The coil rotates
at half a revolution per second and it is placed in a uniform magnetic
field of 0.01 T perpendicular to the axis of rotation of the coil. What is
the maximum voltage generated in the coil?
Solution  Here n = 0.5 Hz; N =100, A = 0.1 m2 and B = 0.01 T. Employing
Eq. (6.19)
e0 = NBA (2 p n)
   = 100 × 0.01 × 0.1 × 2 × 3.14 × 0.5
   = 0.314 V
The maximum voltage is 0.314 V.
We urge you to explore such alternative possibilities for power
generation.
FIGURE 6.14 An alternating emf is generated by a loop of wire rotating in a magnetic field.
up 5 million 100 W bulbs! In most generators, the coils are held
stationary and it is the electromagnets which are rotated. The frequency
of rotation is 50 Hz in India. In certain countries such as USA, it is
60 Hz.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 20 :
 Electromagnetic
Induction
173
SUMMARY
1.
The magnetic flux through a surface of area A placed in a uniform magnetic
field B is defined as,
FB = B.A = BA cos q
where q is the angle between B and A.
2.
Faraday’s laws of induction imply that the emf induced in a coil of N
turns is directly related to the rate of change of flux through it,
B
d
d
N
t
Φ
ε = −
Here FB is the flux linked with one turn of the coil. If the circuit is
closed, a current I = e/R is set up in it, where R is the resistance of the
circuit.
3.
Lenz’s law states that the polarity of the induced emf is such that it
tends to produce a current which opposes the change in magnetic flux
that produces it. The negative sign in the expression for Faraday’s law
indicates this fact.
4.
When a metal rod of length l is placed normal to a uniform magnetic
field B and moved with a velocity v perpendicular to the field, the
induced emf (called motional emf) across its ends is
e = Bl v
5.
Inductance is the ratio of the flux-linkage to current. It is equal to NF/I.
6.
A changing current in a coil (coil 2) can induce an emf in a nearby coil
(coil 1). This relation is given by,
2
1
12
d
d
I
M
t
ε = −
The quantity M12 is called mutual inductance of coil 1 with respect to
coil 2. One can similarly define M21. There exists a general equality,
M12 = M21
7.
When a current in a coil changes, it induces a back emf in the same
coil. The self-induced emf is given by,
d
d
I
L
t
ε = −
L is the self-inductance of the coil. It is a measure of the inertia of the
coil against the change of current through it.
8.
The self-inductance of a long solenoid, the core of which consists of a
magnetic material of relative permeability mr, is given by
L = mr  m0 n2 Al
where A is the area of cross-section of the solenoid, l its length and n
the number of turns per unit length.
9.
In an ac generator, mechanical energy is converted to electrical energy
by virtue of electromagnetic induction. If coil of N turn and area A is
rotated at n revolutions per second in a uniform magnetic field B, then
the motional emf produced is
e = NBA (2pn) sin (2pnt)
where we have assumed that at time t = 0 s, the coil is perpendicular to
the field.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 21 :
 Physics
174
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
Electricity and magnetism are intimately related. In the early part of the
nineteenth century, the experiments of Oersted, Ampere and others
established that moving charges (currents) produce a magnetic field.
Somewhat later, around 1830, the experiments of Faraday and Henry
demonstrated that a moving magnet can induce electric current.
2.
In a closed circuit, electric currents are induced so as to oppose the
changing magnetic flux. It is as per the law of conservation of energy.
However, in case of an open circuit, an emf is induced across its ends.
How is it related to the flux change?
3.
The motional emf discussed in Section 6.5 can be argued independently
from Faraday’s law using the Lorentz force on moving charges. However,
even if the charges are stationary [and the q (v × B) term of the Lorentz
force is not operative], an emf is nevertheless induced in the presence of a
time-varying magnetic field. Thus, moving charges in static field and static
charges in a time-varying field seem to be symmetric situation for Faraday’s
law. This gives a tantalising hint on the relevance of the principle of
relativity for Faraday’s law.
EXERCISES
6.1
Predict the direction of induced current in the situations described
by the following Figs. 6.15(a) to (f ).
Quantity
Symbol
Units
Dimensions
Equations
Magnetic Flux
FB
Wb (weber)
[M L2 T –2 A–1]
FB = B
A
i
EMF
e
V (volt)
[M L2 T –3 A–1]
e = 
B
d(
)/d
N
t
Φ
−
Mutual Inductance
M
H (henry)
[M L2 T –2 A–2]
e1 
(
)
12
2
d
/d
M
I
t
= −
Self Inductance
L
H (henry)
[M L2 T –2 A–2]
(
)
d /d
L
I
t
ε = −
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 22 :
 Electromagnetic
Induction
175
FIGURE 6.15
6.2
Use Lenz’s law to determine the direction of induced current in the
situations described by Fig. 6.16:
(a) A wire of irregular shape turning into a circular shape;
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 23 :
 Physics
176
(b) A circular loop being deformed into a narrow straight wire.
FIGURE 6.16
6.3
A long solenoid with 15 turns per cm has a small loop of area 2.0 cm2
placed inside the solenoid normal to its axis. If the current carried
by the solenoid changes steadily from 2.0 A to 4.0 A in 0.1 s, what is
the induced emf in the loop while the current is changing?
6.4
A rectangular wire loop of sides 8 cm and 2 cm with a small cut is
moving out of a region of uniform magnetic field of magnitude 0.3 T
directed normal to the loop. What is the emf developed across the
cut if the velocity of the loop is 1 cm s–1 in a direction normal to the
(a) longer side, (b) shorter side of the loop? For how long does the
induced voltage last in each case?
6.5
A 1.0 m long metallic rod is rotated with an angular frequency of
400 rad s–1
 about an axis normal to the rod passing through its one
end. The other end of the rod is in contact with a circular metallic
ring. A constant and uniform magnetic field of 0.5 T parallel to the
axis exists everywhere. Calculate the emf developed between the
centre and the ring.
6.6
A horizontal straight wire 10 m long extending from east to west is
falling with a speed of 5.0 m s–1, at right angles to the horizontal
component of the earth’s magnetic field, 0.30 ´ 10–4 Wb m–2.
(a) What is the instantaneous value of the emf induced in the wire?
(b) What is the direction of the emf?
(c) Which end of the wire is at the higher electrical potential?
6.7
Current in a circuit falls from 5.0 A to 0.0 A in 0.1 s. If an average emf
of 200 V induced, give an estimate of  the self-inductance of the circuit.
6.8
A pair of adjacent coils has a mutual inductance of 1.5 H. If the
current in one coil changes from 0 to 20 A in 0.5 s, what is the
change of flux linkage with the other coil?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 1 :
 Chapter Eight
ELECTROMAGNETIC
WAVES
8.1  INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 4, we learnt that an electric current produces magnetic field
and that two current-carrying wires exert a magnetic force on each other.
Further, in Chapter 6, we have seen that a magnetic field changing with
time gives rise to an electric field. Is the converse also true? Does an
electric field changing with time give rise to a magnetic field? James Clerk
Maxwell (1831-1879), argued that this was indeed the case – not only
an electric current but also a time-varying electric field generates magnetic
field. While applying the Ampere’s circuital law to find magnetic field at a
point outside a capacitor connected to a time-varying current, Maxwell
noticed an inconsistency in the Ampere’s circuital law. He suggested the
existence of an additional current, called by him, the displacement
current to remove this inconsistency.
Maxwell formulated a set of equations involving electric and magnetic
fields, and their sources, the charge and current densities. These
equations are known as Maxwell’s equations. Together with the Lorentz
force formula (Chapter 4), they mathematically express all the basic laws
of electromagnetism.
The most important prediction to emerge from Maxwell’s equations
is the existence of electromagnetic waves, which are (coupled) time-
varying electric and magnetic fields that propagate in space. The speed
of the waves,  according to these equations, turned out to be very close to
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 2 :
 Physics
202
the speed of light( 3 ×108 m/s), obtained from optical
measurements. This led to the remarkable conclusion
that light is an electromagnetic wave. Maxwell’s work
thus unified the domain of electricity, magnetism and
light. Hertz, in 1885, experimentally demonstrated the
existence of electromagnetic waves. Its technological use
by Marconi and others led in due course to the
revolution in communication that we are witnessing
today.
In this chapter, we first discuss the need for
displacement current and its consequences. Then we
present a descriptive account of electromagnetic waves.
The broad spectrum of electromagnetic waves,
stretching from g rays (wavelength ~10–12 m) to long
radio waves (wavelength ~106 m) is described.
8.2  DISPLACEMENT CURRENT
We have seen in Chapter 4 that an electrical current
produces a magnetic field around it. Maxwell showed
that for logical consistency, a changing electric field must
also produce a magnetic field. This effect is of great
importance because it explains the existence of radio
waves, gamma rays and visible light, as well as all other
forms of electromagnetic waves.
To see how a changing electric field gives rise to
a magnetic field, let us consider the process of
charging of a capacitor and apply Ampere’s circuital
law given by (Chapter 4)
“B.dl = m0 i (t)
          (8.1)
to find magnetic  field at a point outside the capacitor.
Figure 8.1(a)  shows a parallel plate capacitor C which
is a part of circuit through which a time-dependent
current i (t) flows . Let us find the magnetic field at a
point such as P, in a region outside the parallel plate
capacitor.  For this, we consider a plane circular loop of
radius r whose plane is perpendicular to the direction
of the current-carrying wire, and which is centred
symmetrically with respect to the wire [Fig. 8.1(a)]. From
symmetry, the magnetic field is directed along the
circumference of the circular loop and is the same in
magnitude at all points on the loop so that if B is the
magnitude of the field, the left side of Eq. (8.1) is B (2p r).
So we have
B (2pr) = m0i (t)
   (8 .2)
JAMES CLERK MAXWELL (1831–1879)
James Clerk Maxwell
(1831 – 1879) Born in
Edinburgh, Scotland,
was among the greatest
physicists 
of 
the
nineteenth century. He
derived the thermal
velocity distribution of
molecules in a gas and
was among the first to
obtain 
reliable
estimates of molecular
parameters 
from
measurable quantities
like 
viscosity, 
etc.
Maxwell’s 
greatest
acheivement was the
unification of the laws of
electricity 
and
magnetism (discovered
by Coulomb, Oersted,
Ampere and Faraday)
into a consistent set of
equations now called
Maxwell’s equations.
From these he arrived at
the most important
conclusion that light is
an 
electromagnetic
wave. 
Interestingly,
Maxwell did not agree
with the idea (strongly
suggested 
by 
the
Faraday’s 
laws 
of
electrolysis) 
that
electricity 
was
particulate in nature.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 3 :
 203
Electromagnetic
Waves
Now, consider a different surface, which has the same boundary. This
is a pot like surface [Fig. 8.1(b)] which nowhere touches the current, but
has its bottom between the capacitor plates; its mouth is the circular
loop mentioned above. Another such surface is shaped like a tiffin box
(without the lid) [Fig. 8.1(c)]. On applying Ampere’s circuital law to such
surfaces with the same perimeter, we find that the left hand side of
Eq. (8.1) has not changed but the right hand side is zero and not m0i,
since no current passes through the surface of Fig. 8.1(b) and (c). So we
have a contradiction; calculated one way, there is a magnetic field at a
point P; calculated another way, the magnetic field at P is zero.
Since the contradiction arises from our use of Ampere’s circuital law,
this law must be missing something. The missing term must be such
that one gets the same magnetic field at point P,  no matter what surface
is used.
We can actually guess the missing term by looking carefully at
Fig. 8.1(c). Is there anything passing through the surface S between the
plates of the capacitor? Yes, of course, the electric field! If the plates of the
capacitor have an area A, and a total charge Q, the magnitude of the
electric field E between the plates is (Q/A)/e0 (see Eq. 2.41). The field is
perpendicular to the surface S of Fig. 8.1(c). It has the same magnitude
over the area A of the capacitor plates, and vanishes outside it. So what
is the electric flux FE through the surface S ? Using Gauss’s law, it is
E
0
0
1
=
=
Q
Q
A
A
A
Φ
ε
ε
=
E
(8.3)
Now if the charge Q on the capacitor plates changes with time, there is a
current i = (dQ/dt), so that using Eq. (8.3), we have
d
d
d
d
d
d
ΦE
t
t
Q
Q
t
=



=
ε
ε
0
0
1
This implies that for consistency,
ε0
d
d
ΦE
t



 = i
(8.4)
This is the missing term in Ampere’s circuital law. If we generalise
this law by adding to the total current carried by conductors through
the surface, another term which is e0 times the rate of change of electric
flux through the same surface, the total has the same value of current i
for all surfaces. If this is done, there is no contradiction in the value of B
obtained anywhere using the generalised Ampere’s law. B at the point P
is non-zero no matter which surface is used for calculating it. B at a
point P outside the plates [Fig. 8.1(a)] is the same as at a point M just
inside, as it should be. The current carried by conductors due to flow of
charges is called conduction current. The current, given by Eq. (8.4), is a
new term, and is due to changing electric field (or electric displacement,
an old term still used sometimes). It is, therefore, called displacement
current or Maxwell’s displacement current. Figure 8.2 shows the electric
and magnetic fields inside the parallel plate capacitor discussed above.
The generalisation made by Maxwell then is the following. The source
of a magnetic field is not just the conduction electric current due to flowing
FIGURE 8.1 A
parallel plate
capacitor C, as part of
a circuit through
which a time
dependent current
i (t) flows,  (a) a loop of
radius r, to determine
magnetic field at a
point P on the loop;
(b) a pot-shaped
surface passing
through the interior
between the capacitor
plates with the loop
shown in (a) as its
rim; (c) a tiffin-
shaped surface with
the circular loop as
its rim and a flat
circular bottom S
between the capacitor
plates. The arrows
show uniform electric
field between the
capacitor plates.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 4 :
 Physics
204
charges, but also the time rate of change of electric field. More
precisely, the total current i is the sum of the conduction current
denoted by ic, and the displacement current denoted by id (= e0 (dFE/
dt)). So we have
0
d
d
E
c
d
c
i
i
i
i
t
Φ
ε
=
+
=
+
(8.5)
In explicit terms, this means that outside the capacitor plates,
we have only conduction current ic = i, and no displacement
current, i.e., id = 0. On the other hand, inside the capacitor, there is
no conduction current, i.e., ic = 0, and there is only displacement
current, so that id = i.
The generalised (and correct) Ampere’s circuital law has the same
form as Eq. (8.1), with one difference: “the total current passing
through any surface of which the closed loop is the perimeter” is
the sum of the conduction current and the displacement current.
The generalised law is
B
l
g
Ñ
d =
d
d
0
µ
µ
ε
0
0
i
t
c
E
+
∫
Φ
(8.6)
and is known as Ampere-Maxwell law.
In all respects, the displacement current has the same physical
effects as the conduction current. In some cases, for example, steady
electric fields in a conducting wire, the displacement current may
be zero since the electric field E does not change with time. In other
cases, for example, the charging capacitor above, both conduction
and displacement currents may be present in different regions of
space. In most of the cases, they both may be present in the same
region of space, as there exist no perfectly conducting or perfectly
insulating medium. Most interestingly, there may be large regions
of space where there is no conduction current, but there is only a
displacement current due to time-varying electric fields. In such a
region, we expect a magnetic field, though there is no (conduction)
current source nearby! The prediction of such a displacement current
can be verified experimentally. For example, a magnetic field (say at point
M) between the plates of the capacitor in Fig. 8.2(a) can be measured and
is seen to be the same as that just outside (at P).
The displacement current has (literally) far reaching consequences.
One thing we immediately notice is that the laws of electricity and
magnetism are now more symmetrical*. Faraday’s law of induction states
that there is an induced emf equal to the rate of change of magnetic flux.
Now, since the emf between two points 1 and 2 is the work done per unit
charge in taking it from 1 to 2, the existence of an emf implies the existence
of an electric field. So, we can rephrase Faraday’s law of electromagnetic
induction by saying that a magnetic field, changing with time, gives rise
to an electric field. Then, the fact that an electric field changing with
time gives rise to a magnetic field, is the symmetrical counterpart, and is
FIGURE 8.2 (a) The
electric and magnetic
fields E and B between
the capacitor plates, at
the point M. (b) A cross
sectional view of Fig. (a).
*
They are still not perfectly symmetrical; there are no known sources of magnetic
field (magnetic monopoles) analogous to electric charges which are sources of
electric field.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 5 :
 205
Electromagnetic
Waves
a consequence of the displacement current being a source of a magnetic
field. Thus, time- dependent electric and magnetic fields give rise to each
other! Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction and Ampere-Maxwell
law give a quantitative expression of this statement, with the current
being the total current, as in Eq. (8.5). One very important consequence
of this symmetry is the existence of electromagnetic waves, which we
discuss qualitatively in the next section.
MAXWELL’S EQUATIONS IN VACUUM
1. “E.dA = Q/✒0
(Gauss’s Law for electricity)
2. “B.dA = 0
(Gauss’s Law for magnetism)
3. “E.dl = –d
d
B
Φ
t
=
(Faraday’s Law)
4. “B.dl =
d
d
0
µ
µ ε
0
0
i
t
c
E
+
Φ
(Ampere – Maxwell Law)
8.3  ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
8.3.1  Sources of electromagnetic waves
How are electromagnetic waves produced? Neither stationary charges
nor charges in uniform motion (steady currents) can be sources of
electromagnetic waves. The former produces only electrostatic fields, while
the latter produces magnetic fields that, however, do not vary with time.
It is an important result of Maxwell’s theory that accelerated charges
radiate electromagnetic waves. The proof of this basic result is beyond
the scope of this book, but we can accept it on the basis of rough,
qualitative reasoning. Consider a charge oscillating with some frequency.
(An oscillating charge is an example of accelerating charge.)   This
produces an oscillating electric field in space, which produces an
oscillating magnetic field, which in turn, is a source of oscillating electric
field, and so on. The oscillating electric and magnetic fields thus
regenerate each other, so to speak, as the wave propagates through the
space. The frequency of the electromagnetic wave naturally equals the
frequency of oscillation of the charge. The energy associated with the
propagating wave comes at the expense of the energy of the source – the
accelerated charge.
From the preceding discussion, it might appear easy to test the
prediction that light is an electromagnetic wave. We might think that all
we needed to do was to set up an ac circuit in which the current oscillate
at the frequency of visible light, say, yellow light. But, alas, that is not
possible. The frequency of yellow light is about 6 × 1014 Hz, while the
frequency that we get even with modern electronic circuits is hardly about
1011 Hz. This is why the experimental demonstration of electromagnetic
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 6 :
 Physics
206
wave had to come in the low frequency region (the radio
wave region), as in the Hertz’s experiment (1887).
Hertz’s successful experimental test of Maxwell’s
theory created a sensation and sparked off other
important works in this field. Two important
achievements in this connection deserve mention. Seven
years after Hertz, Jagdish Chandra Bose, working at
Calcutta (now Kolkata), succeeded in producing and
observing electromagnetic waves of much shorter
wavelength (25 mm to 5 mm). His experiment, like that
of Hertz’s, was confined to the laboratory.
At around the same time, Guglielmo Marconi in Italy
followed Hertz’s work and succeeded in transmitting
electromagnetic waves over distances of many kilometres.
Marconi’s experiment marks the beginning of the field of
communication using electromagnetic waves.
8.3.2  Nature of electromagnetic waves
It can be shown from Maxwell’s equations that electric
and magnetic fields in an electromagnetic wave are
perpendicular to each other, and to the direction of
propagation. It appears reasonable, say from our
discussion of the displacement current. Consider
Fig. 8.2. The electric field inside the plates of the capacitor
is directed perpendicular to the plates. The magnetic
field this gives rise to via the displacement current is
along the perimeter of a circle parallel to the capacitor
plates. So B and E are perpendicular in this case. This
is a general feature.
In Fig. 8.3, we show a typical example of a plane
electromagnetic wave propagating along the z direction
(the fields are shown as a function of the z coordinate, at
a given time t). The electric field Ex is along the x-axis,
and varies sinusoidally with z, at a given time. The
magnetic field By is along the y-axis, and again varies
sinusoidally with z. The electric and magnetic fields Ex
and By are perpendicular to each
other, and to the direction z of
propagation. We can write Ex and
By as follows:
Ex= E0 sin (kz–wt)
[8.7(a)]
By= B0 sin (kz–wt)
[8.7(b)]
Here k is related to the wave length
l of the wave by the usual
equation
2
k
λ
π
=
(8.8)
 EXAMPLE 8.1
Heinrich Rudolf Hertz
(1857 – 1894) German
physicist who was the
first to broadcast and
receive radio waves. He
produced 
electro-
magnetic waves, sent
them through space, and
measured their wave-
length and speed. He
showed that the nature
of 
their 
vibration,
reflection and refraction
was the same as that of
light and heat waves,
establishing 
their
identity for the first time.
He 
also 
pioneered
research on discharge of
electricity through gases,
and 
discovered 
the
photoelectric effect.
HEINRICH RUDOLF HERTZ (1857–1894)
FIGURE 8.3 A linearly polarised electromagnetic wave,
propagating in the z-direction with the oscillating electric field E
along the x-direction and the oscillating magnetic field B along
the y-direction.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 7 :
 207
Electromagnetic
Waves
and ω   is the angular frequency. k is the magnitude of the wave vector (or
propagation vector) k and its direction describes the direction of
propagation of the wave. The speed of propagation of the wave is (ω/k).
Using Eqs. [8.7(a) and (b)] for Ex and By  and Maxwell’s equations, one
finds that
ω = ck, where, c = 1/
0
0
µ ε
[8.9(a)]
The relation ω = ck is the standard one for waves (see for example,
Section 14.4 of class XI Physics textbook). This relation is often written
in terms of frequency, ν (=ω/2π) and wavelength, λ (=2π/k) as
2
2
πν
λ
=




c
π
   or
νλ = c
[8.9(b)]
It is also seen from Maxwell’s equations that the magnitude of the
electric and the magnetic fields in an electromagnetic wave are related as
B0 = (E0/c)
(8.10)
We here make remarks on some features of electromagnetic waves.
They are self-sustaining oscillations of electric and magnetic fields in
free space, or vacuum. They differ from all the other waves we have
studied so far, in respect that no material medium is involved in the
vibrations of the electric and magnetic fields.
But what if a material medium is actually there? We know that light,
an electromagnetic wave, does propagate through glass, for example. We
have seen earlier that the total electric and magnetic fields inside a
medium are described in terms of a permittivity ε and a magnetic
permeability µ (these describe the factors  by which the total fields differ
from the external fields). These replace ε0 and µ0 in the description to
electric and magnetic fields in Maxwell’s equations with the result that in
a material medium of permittivity ε and magnetic permeability µ, the
velocity of light becomes,
1
v
µε
=
(8.11)
Thus, the velocity of light depends on electric and magnetic properties of
the medium. We shall see in the next chapter that the refractive index of
one medium with respect to the other is equal to the ratio of velocities of
light in the two media.
The velocity of electromagnetic waves in free space or vacuum is an
important fundamental constant. It has been shown by experiments on
electromagnetic waves of different wavelengths that this velocity is the
same (independent of wavelength) to within a few metres per second, out
of a value of 3×108 m/s. The constancy of the velocity of em waves in
vacuum is so strongly supported by experiments and the actual value is
so well known now that this is used to define a standard of length.
The great technological importance of electromagnetic waves stems
from their capability to carry energy from one place to another. The
radio and TV signals from broadcasting stations carry energy. Light
carries energy from the sun to the earth, thus making life possible on
the earth.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 8 :
 Physics
208
 EXAMPLE 8.2
 EXAMPLE 8.1
Example 8.1 A plane electromagnetic wave of frequency
25 MHz travels in free space along the x-direction. At a particular
point in space and time, E = 6.3 ˆj  V/m. What is B at this point?
Solution Using Eq. (8.10), the magnitude of B is
–8
8
6.3 V/m
2.1 10
T
3 10 m/s
E
B
c
=
=
=
×
×
To find the direction, we note that E is along y-direction and the
wave propagates along x-axis. Therefore, B should be in a direction
perpendicular to both x- and y-axes. Using vector algebra, E × B should
be along  x-direction. Since, (+ ˆj ) × (+ ˆk ) = ˆi , B is along the z-direction.
Thus,
B = 2.1 × 10–8 ˆk T
Example 8.2 The magnetic field in a plane electromagnetic wave is
given by By = (2 × 10–7) T sin (0.5×103x+1.5×1011t).
(a) What is the wavelength and frequency of the wave?
(b) Write an expression for the electric field.
Solution
(a) Comparing the given equation with
2p
λ
x
t
T
+








By=B0 Sin
We get, 
3
2
0.5
10
π
λ =
×
 m = 1.26 cm,
and
  
(
)
11
1
1.5
10
/2
23.9 GHz
T
ν
=
=
×
π =
(b) E0 = B0c = 2×10–7 T × 3 × 108 m/s = 6 × 101 V/m
The electric field component is perpendicular to the direction of
propagation and the direction of magnetic field. Therefore, the
electric field component along the z-axis is obtained as
Ez = 60 sin (0.5 × 103x + 1.5 × 1011 t) V/m
8.4  ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM
At the time Maxwell predicted the existence of electromagnetic waves, the
only familiar electromagnetic waves were the visible light waves. The existence
of ultraviolet and infrared waves was barely established. By the end of the
nineteenth century, X-rays and gamma rays had also been discovered.  We
now know that, electromagnetic waves include visible light waves, X-rays,
gamma rays, radio waves, microwaves, ultraviolet and infrared waves. The
classification of em waves according to frequency is the electromagnetic
spectrum (Fig. 8.4). There is no sharp division between one kind of wave
and the next. The classification is based roughly on how the waves are
produced and/or detected.
We briefly describe these different types of electromagnetic waves, in
order of decreasing wavelengths.
Electromagnetic spectrum
http://www.fnal.gov/pub/inquiring/more/light
http://imagine.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/science/
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 9 :
 209
Electromagnetic
Waves
FIGURE 8.4 The electromagnetic spectrum, with common names for various
part of it. The various regions do not have sharply defined boundaries.
8.4.1  Radio waves
Radio waves are produced by the accelerated motion of charges in conducting
wires. They are used in radio and television communication systems. They
are generally in the frequency range from 500 kHz to about 1000 MHz.
The AM (amplitude modulated) band is from 530 kHz to 1710 kHz. Higher
frequencies upto 54 MHz are used for short wave bands. TV waves range
from 54 MHz to 890 MHz. The FM (frequency modulated) radio band
extends from 88 MHz to 108 MHz. Cellular phones use radio waves to
transmit voice communication in the ultrahigh frequency (UHF) band. How
these waves are transmitted and received is described in Chapter 15.
8.4.2  Microwaves
Microwaves (short-wavelength radio waves), with frequencies in the
gigahertz (GHz) range, are produced by special vacuum tubes (called
klystrons, magnetrons and Gunn diodes). Due to their short wavelengths,
they are suitable for the radar systems used in aircraft navigation. Radar
also provides the basis for the speed guns used to time fast balls, tennis-
serves, and automobiles. Microwave ovens are an interesting domestic
application of these waves. In such ovens, the frequency of the microwaves
is selected to match the resonant frequency of water molecules so that
energy from the waves is transferred efficiently to the kinetic energy of
the molecules. This raises the temperature of any food containing water.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 10 :
 Physics
210
8.4.3 Infrared waves
Infrared waves are produced by hot bodies and molecules. This band
lies adjacent to the low-frequency or long-wave length end of the visible
spectrum. Infrared waves are sometimes referred to as heat waves. This
is because water molecules present in most materials readily absorb
infrared waves (many other molecules, for example, CO2, NH3, also absorb
infrared waves). After absorption, their thermal motion increases, that is,
they heat up and heat their surroundings. Infrared lamps are used in
physical therapy. Infrared radiation also plays an important role in
maintaining the earth’s warmth or average temperature through the
greenhouse effect. Incoming visible light (which passes relatively easily
through the atmosphere) is absorbed by the earth’s surface and re-
radiated as infrared (longer wavelength) radiations. This radiation is
trapped by greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and water vapour.
Infrared detectors are used in Earth satellites, both for military purposes
and to observe growth of crops. Electronic devices (for example
semiconductor light emitting diodes) also   emit infrared and are widely
used in the remote switches of household electronic systems such as TV
sets, video recorders and hi-fi systems.
8.4.4 Visible rays
It is the most familiar form of electromagnetic waves. It is the part of the
spectrum that is detected by the human eye. It runs from about
4 × 1014 Hz to about 7 × 1014
 Hz or a wavelength range of about 700 –
400 nm. Visible light emitted or reflected from objects around us provides
us information about the world. Our eyes are sensitive to this range of
wavelengths. Different animals are sensitive to different range of
wavelengths. For example, snakes can detect infrared waves, and the
‘visible’ range of many insects extends well into the utraviolet.
8.4.5 Ultraviolet rays
It covers wavelengths ranging from about 4 × 10–7 m (400 nm) down to
6 × 10–10m (0.6 nm). Ultraviolet (UV) radiation is produced by special
lamps and very hot bodies. The sun is an important source of ultraviolet
light. But fortunately, most of it is absorbed in the ozone layer in the
atmosphere at an altitude of about 40 – 50 km. UV light in large quantities
has harmful effects on humans. Exposure to UV radiation induces the
production of more melanin, causing tanning of the skin. UV radiation is
absorbed by ordinary glass. Hence, one cannot get tanned or sunburn
through glass windows.
Welders wear special glass goggles or face masks with glass windows
to protect their eyes from large amount of UV produced by welding arcs.
Due to its  shorter wavelengths, UV radiations  can be focussed into very
narrow beams for high precision applications such as  LASIK (Laser-
assisted in situ keratomileusis) eye surgery. UV lamps are used to kill
germs  in water purifiers.
Ozone layer in the atmosphere plays a protective role, and hence its
depletion by chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) gas (such as freon) is a matter
of international concern.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 11 :
 211
Electromagnetic
Waves
8.4.6 X-rays
Beyond the UV region of the electromagnetic spectrum lies the X-ray
region. We are familiar with X-rays because of its medical applications. It
covers wavelengths from about 10–8 m (10 nm) down to 10–13 m
(10–4 nm). One common way to generate X-rays is to bombard a metal
target by high energy electrons. X-rays are used as a diagnostic tool in
medicine and as a treatment for certain forms of cancer. Because X-rays
damage or destroy living tissues and organisms, care must be taken to
avoid unnecessary or over exposure.
8.4.7 Gamma rays
They lie in the upper frequency range of the electromagnetic spectrum
and have wavelengths of from about 10–10m to less than 10–14m. This
high frequency radiation is produced in nuclear reactions and
also emitted by radioactive nuclei. They are used in medicine to destroy
cancer cells.
Table 8.1 summarises different types of electromagnetic waves, their
production and detections. As mentioned earlier, the demarcation between
different regions is not sharp and there are overlaps.
TABLE 8.1 DIFFERENT TYPES OF ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
Type
Wavelength range
Production
Detection
Radio
> 0.1 m
Rapid  acceleration and
Receiver’s aerials
decelerations of electrons
in aerials
Microwave
0.1m to 1 mm
Klystron valve or
Point contact diodes
magnetron valve
Infra-red
1mm to 700 nm
Vibration of atoms
Thermopiles
and molecules
Bolometer, Infrared
photographic film
Light
700 nm to 400 nm
Electrons in atoms emit
The eye
light when they move from
Photocells
one energy level to a
Photographic film
lower energy level
Ultraviolet
400 nm to 1nm
Inner shell electrons in
Photocells
atoms moving from one
Photographic film
energy level  to a lower level
X-rays
1nm to 10–3 nm
X-ray tubes or inner shell
Photographic film
electrons
Geiger tubes
Ionisation chamber
Gamma rays
 <10–3 nm
Radioactive decay of the
-do-
nucleus
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 12 :
 Physics
212
SUMMARY
1.
Maxwell found an inconsistency in the Ampere’s law and suggested the
existence of an additional current, called displacement current, to remove
this inconsistency. This displacement current is due to time-varying electric
field and is given by
0
d
d
di
t
Φ
ε
Ε
=
and acts as a source of magnetic field in exactly the same way as conduction
current.
2.
An accelerating charge produces electromagnetic waves. An electric charge
oscillating harmonically with frequency n, produces electromagnetic waves
of the same frequency n. An electric dipole is a basic source of
electromagnetic waves.
3.
Electromagnetic waves with wavelength of the order of a few metres were
first produced and detected in the laboratory by Hertz in 1887. He thus
verified a basic prediction of Maxwell’s equations.
4.
Electric and magnetic fields oscillate sinusoidally in space and time in an
electromagnetic wave. The oscillating electric and magnetic fields, E and
B are perpendicular to each other, and to the direction of propagation of
the electromagnetic wave. For a wave of frequency n, wavelength l,
propagating along z-direction, we have
E  = Ex (t) = E0 sin (kz – w t )
   = E0 sin    2
2
0
π
π
z
t
E
z
t
T
λ
ν
λ
−







=
−








sin
B = By(t) = B0 sin (kz – w t)
   = B
z
t
B
z
t
T
0
0
2
2
sin
sin
π
π
λ
ν
λ
−







=
−








They are related by E0/B0 = c.
5.
The speed c of electromagnetic wave in vacuum is related to m0 and e0 (the
free space permeability and permittivity constants) as follows:
0
0
1/
c
µ ε
=
. The value of c equals the speed of light obtained from
optical measurements.
Light is an electromagnetic wave; c is, therefore, also the speed of light.
Electromagnetic waves other than light also have the same velocity c in
free space.
The speed of light, or of electromagnetic waves in a material medium is
given by 
1/
v
µ ε
=
where m is the permeability of the medium and e its permittivity.
6.
The spectrum of electromagnetic waves stretches, in principle, over an
infinite range of wavelengths. Different regions are known by different
names; g-rays, X-rays, ultraviolet rays, visible rays, infrared rays,
microwaves and radio waves in order of increasing wavelength  from 10–2 Å
or 10–12 m to 106 m.
They interact with matter via their electric and magnetic fields which set
in oscillation charges present in all matter. The detailed interaction and
so the mechanism of absorption, scattering, etc., depend on the wavelength
of the electromagnetic wave, and the nature of the atoms and molecules
in the medium.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 13 :
 213
Electromagnetic
Waves
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
The basic difference between various types of electromagnetic waves
lies in their wavelengths or frequencies since all of them travel through
vacuum with the same speed. Consequently, the waves differ
considerably in their mode of interaction with matter.
2.
Accelerated charged particles radiate electromagnetic waves. The
wavelength of the electromagnetic wave is often correlated with the
characteristic size of the system that radiates. Thus, gamma radiation,
having wavelength of 10–14 m to 10–15 m, typically originate from an
atomic nucleus. X-rays are emitted from heavy atoms. Radio waves
are produced by accelerating electrons in a circuit. A transmitting
antenna can most efficiently radiate waves having a wavelength of
about the same size as the antenna. Visible radiation emitted by atoms
is, however, much longer in wavelength than atomic size.
3.
Infrared waves, with frequencies lower than those of visible light,
vibrate not only the electrons, but entire atoms or molecules of a
substance. This vibration increases the internal energy and
consequently, the temperature of the substance. This is why infrared
waves are often called heat waves.
4.
The centre of sensitivity of our eyes coincides with the centre of the
wavelength distribution of the sun. It is because humans have evolved
with visions most sensitive to the strongest wavelengths from
the sun.
EXERCISES
8.1
Figure 8.5 shows a capacitor made of two circular plates each of
radius 12 cm, and separated by 5.0 cm. The capacitor is being
charged by an external source (not shown in the figure). The
charging current is constant and equal to 0.15A.
(a)
Calculate the capacitance and the rate of change of potential
difference between the plates.
(b)
Obtain the displacement current across the plates.
(c)
Is Kirchhoff’s first rule (junction rule) valid at each plate of the
capacitor? Explain.
FIGURE 8.5
8.2
A parallel plate capacitor (Fig. 8.6) made of circular plates each of radius
R = 6.0 cm has a capacitance C = 100 pF. The capacitor is connected to
a 230 V ac supply with a (angular) frequency of 300 rad s–1.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 08 - Page 14 :
 Physics
214
(a)
What is the rms value of the conduction current?
(b)
Is the conduction current equal to the displacement current?
(c)
Determine the amplitude of B at a point 3.0 cm from the axis
between the plates.
FIGURE 8.6
8.3
What physical quantity is the same for X-rays of wavelength
10–10 m, red light of wavelength 6800 Å and radiowaves of wavelength
500m?
8.4
A plane electromagnetic wave travels in vacuum along z-direction.
What can you say about the directions of its electric and magnetic
field vectors? If the frequency of the wave is 30 MHz, what is its
wavelength?
8.5
A radio can tune in to any station in the 7.5 MHz to 12 MHz band.
What is the corresponding wavelength band?
8.6
A charged particle oscillates about its mean equilibrium position
with a frequency of 10 9 Hz. What is the frequency of the
electromagnetic waves produced by the oscillator?
8.7
The amplitude of the magnetic field part of a harmonic
electromagnetic wave in vacuum is B0 = 510 nT. What is the
amplitude of the electric field part of the wave?
8.8
Suppose that the electric field amplitude of an electromagnetic wave
is E0 = 120 N/C and that its frequency is n = 50.0 MHz. (a) Determine,
B0,w, k, and l. (b) Find expressions for E and B.
8.9
The terminology of different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum
is given in the text. Use the formula E = hn (for energy of a quantum
of radiation: photon) and obtain the photon energy in units of eV for
different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. In what way are
the different scales of photon energies that you obtain related to the
sources of electromagnetic radiation?
8.10
In a plane electromagnetic wave, the electric field oscillates
sinusoidally at a frequency of 2.0 × 1010 Hz and amplitude 48 V m–1.
(a)
What is the wavelength of the wave?
(b)
What is the amplitude of the oscillating magnetic field?
(c)
Show that the average energy density of the E field equals the
average energy density of the B field. [c = 3 × 108 m s–1.]
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 1 :
 7.1  INTRODUCTION
We have so far considered direct current (dc) sources and circuits with dc
sources. These currents do not change direction with time. But voltages
and currents that vary with time are very common. The electric mains
supply in our homes and offices is a voltage that varies like a sine function
with time. Such a voltage is called alternating voltage (ac voltage) and
the current driven by it in a circuit is called the alternating current (ac
current)*. Today, most of the electrical devices we use require ac voltage.
This is mainly because most of the electrical energy sold by power
companies is transmitted and distributed as alternating current. The main
reason for preferring use of ac voltage over dc voltage is that ac voltages
can be easily and efficiently converted from one voltage to the other by
means of transformers. Further, electrical energy can also be transmitted
economically over long distances. AC circuits exhibit characteristics which
are exploited in many devices of daily use. For example, whenever we
tune our radio to a favourite station, we are taking advantage of a special
property of ac circuits – one of many that you will study in this chapter.
Chapter Seven
ALTERNATING
CURRENT
*
The phrases ac voltage and ac current are contradictory and redundant,
respectively, since they mean, literally, alternating current voltage and alternating
current current. Still, the abbreviation ac to designate an electrical quantity
displaying simple harmonic time dependance has become so universally accepted
that we follow others in its use. Further, voltage – another phrase commonly
used means potential difference between two points.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 2 :
 Physics
178
NICOLA TESLA (1856 – 1943)
Nicola Tesla  (1856 –
1943) Serbian-American
scientist, inventor and
genius. He conceived the
idea 
of 
the 
rotating
magnetic field, which is the
basis of practically all
alternating 
current
machinery, and which
helped usher in the age of
electric power. He also
invented among other
things the induction motor,
the polyphase system of ac
power, 
and 
the 
high
frequency induction coil
(the Tesla coil) used in radio
and television sets and
other electronic equipment.
The SI unit of magnetic field
is named in his honour.
7.2  AC VOLTAGE APPLIED TO A RESISTOR
Figure 7.1 shows a resistor connected to a source ε of
ac voltage. The symbol for an ac source in a circuit
diagram is 
. We consider a source which produces
sinusoidally varying potential difference across its
terminals. Let this potential difference, also called ac
voltage, be given by
sin
m
v
v
t
ω
=
(7.1)
where vm is the amplitude of the oscillating potential
difference and ω  is its angular frequency.
To find the value of current through the resistor, we
apply Kirchhoff’s loop rule 
ε( )t =
∑
0 (refer to Section
3.12), to the circuit shown in Fig. 7.1 to get
=
sin
m
v
t
i R
ω
or   
sin
m
v
i
t
R
ω
=
Since R is a constant, we can write this equation as
sin
m
i
i
t
ω
=
(7.2)
where the current amplitude im is given by
m
m
v
i
R
=
(7.3)
Equation (7.3) is Ohm’s law, which for resistors, works equally
well for both ac and dc voltages. The voltage across a pure resistor
and the current through it, given by Eqs. (7.1) and (7.2) are
plotted as a function of time in Fig. 7.2. Note, in particular that
both v and i reach zero, minimum and maximum values at the
same time. Clearly, the voltage and current are in phase with
each other.
We see that, like the applied voltage, the current varies
sinusoidally and has corresponding positive and negative values
during each cycle. Thus, the sum of the instantaneous current
values over one complete cycle is zero, and the average current
is zero. The fact that the average current is zero, however, does
FIGURE 7.1  AC voltage applied to a resistor.
FIGURE 7.2 In a pure
resistor, the voltage and
current are in phase. The
minima, zero and maxima
occur at the same
respective times.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 3 :
 179
Alternating Current
GEORGE WESTINGHOUSE (1846 – 1914)
George 
Westinghouse
(1846 – 1914) A leading
proponent of the use of
alternating current over
direct 
current. 
Thus,
he came into conflict
with Thomas Alva Edison,
an advocate of direct
current. 
Westinghouse
was convinced that the
technology of alternating
current was the key to
the 
electrical 
future.
He founded the famous
Company named after him
and enlisted the services
of 
Nicola 
Tesla 
and
other inventors in the
development of alternating
current 
motors 
and
apparatus 
for 
the
transmission 
of 
high
tension current, pioneering
in large scale lighting.
not mean that the average power consumed is zero and
that there is no dissipation of electrical energy. As you
know, Joule heating is given by i2R and depends on i2
(which is always positive whether i is positive or negative)
and not on i. Thus, there is Joule heating and
dissipation 
of 
electrical 
energy 
when 
an
ac current passes through a resistor.
The instantaneous power dissipated in the resistor is
2
2
2
sin
m
p
i R
i R
t
ω
=
=
(7.4)
The average value of p over a cycle is*
2
2
2
sin
m
p
i R
i R
t
ω
= <
> = <
>
  [7.5(a)]
where the bar over a letter (here, p) denotes its average
value and <......> denotes taking average of the quantity
inside the bracket. Since,  i2
m and R are constants,
2
2
sin
m
p
i R
t
ω
=
<
>
[7.5(b)]
Using the trigonometric identity, sin2 wt =
1/2 (1– cos 2wt), we have < sin2 wt > = (1/2) (1– < cos 2wt >)
and since < cos2wt > = 0**, we have,
2
1
sin
2
t
ω
<
> =
Thus,
2
1
2
m
p
i R
=
[7.5(c)]
To express ac power in the same form as dc power
(P = I2R), a special value of current is defined and used.
It is called, root mean square (rms) or effective current
(Fig. 7.3) and is denoted by Irms or I.
*
The average value of a function F (t) over a period T is given by F t
T
F t
t
T
( )
( )
=
∫
1
0
d
** <
> =
∫
=




=
−
[
] =
cos
cos
sin
sin
2
1
2
1
2
2
1
2
2
0
0
0
0
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
ω
t
T
t dt
T
t
T
T
T
T
FIGURE 7.3 The rms current I is related to the
peak  current im by I = 
/ 2
mi
 = 0.707 im.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 4 :
 Physics
180
It is defined by
2
2
1
2
2
m
m
i
I
i
i
=
=
=
= 0.707 im
(7.6)
In terms of I, the average power, denoted by P is
2
2
1
2
m
p
P
i R
I R
=
=
=
(7.7)
Similarly, we define the rms voltage or effective voltage by
V = 
2
m
v
 = 0.707 vm
(7.8)
From Eq. (7.3), we have
vm = imR
or,  
2
2
m
m
v
i
R
=
or,  V = IR
(7.9)
Equation (7.9) gives the relation between ac current and ac voltage
and is similar to that in the dc case. This shows the advantage of
introducing the concept of rms values. In terms of rms values, the equation
for power [Eq. (7.7)] and relation between current and voltage in ac circuits
are essentially the same as those for the dc case.
It is customary to measure and specify rms values for ac quantities. For
example, the household line voltage of 220 V is an rms value with a peak
voltage of
vm = 2  V =  (1.414)(220 V) = 311 V
In fact, the I or rms current is the equivalent dc current that would
produce the same average power loss as the alternating current. Equation
(7.7) can also be written as
P = V2 / R = I V    (since V = I R)
Example 7.1 A light  bulb is rated at 100W for a 220 V supply. Find
(a) the resistance of the bulb; (b) the peak voltage of the source; and
(c) the rms current through the bulb.
Solution
(a) We are given P = 100 W and V = 220 V. The resistance of the
bulb is
(
)
2
2
220 V
484
100 W
V
R
P
=
=
=
Ω
(b) The peak voltage of the source is
V
2
311
m
v
V
=
=
(c) Since, P = I V
100 W
0.454A
220 V



P
I
V
 EXAMPLE 7.1
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 5 :
 181
Alternating Current
7.3 REPRESENTATION OF AC CURRENT AND VOLTAGE
BY ROTATING VECTORS — PHASORS
In the previous section, we learnt that the current through  a resistor is
in phase with the ac voltage. But this is not so in the case  of an inductor,
a capacitor or a combination  of these circuit elements. In order to show
phase relationship between voltage and current
in an ac circuit, we use the notion of phasors.
The analysis of an ac circuit is facilitated by the
use of a phasor diagram. A phasor* is a vector
which rotates about the origin with angular
speed w, as shown in Fig. 7.4. The vertical
components of phasors V and I represent the
sinusoidally varying quantities v and i. The
magnitudes of phasors V and I represent  the
amplitudes or the peak values vm and im of these
oscillating quantities. Figure 7.4(a) shows the
voltage and current phasors and their
relationship at time t1 for the case of an ac source
connected to a resistor i.e., corresponding to the
circuit shown in Fig. 7.1. The projection of
voltage and current phasors on vertical axis, i.e., vm sinw t and im sinw t,
respectively represent the value of voltage and current at that instant. As
they rotate with frequency w, curves in Fig. 7.4(b) are generated.
From Fig. 7.4(a) we see that phasors V and I for the case of a resistor are
in the same direction. This is so for all times. This means that the phase
angle between the voltage and the current is zero.
7.4  AC VOLTAGE APPLIED TO AN INDUCTOR
Figure 7.5 shows an ac source connected to an inductor. Usually,
inductors have appreciable resistance in their windings, but we shall
assume that this inductor has negligible resistance.
Thus, the circuit is a purely inductive ac circuit. Let
the voltage across the source be v = vm sinw t. Using
the Kirchhoff’s loop rule, 
ε ( )t =
∑
0 , and  since there
is no resistor in the circuit,
d
0
d
i
v
L
t
−
=
(7.10)
where the second term is the self-induced Faraday
emf in the inductor; and L is the self-inductance of
FIGURE 7.4 (a) A phasor diagram for the
circuit in Fig 7.1. (b) Graph of v and
i versus wt.
FIGURE 7.5  An ac source
connected to an inductor.
*
Though voltage and current in ac circuit are represented by phasors – rotating
vectors, they are not vectors themselves. They are scalar quantities. It so happens
that the amplitudes and phases of harmonically varying scalars combine
mathematically in the same way as do the projections of rotating vectors of
corresponding magnitudes and directions. The rotating vectors that represent
harmonically varying scalar quantities are introduced only to provide us with a
simple way of adding these quantities using a rule that we already know.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 6 :
 Physics
182
the inductor. The negative sign follows from Lenz’s law (Chapter 6).
Combining Eqs. (7.1) and (7.10), we have
d
sin
d
m
v
i
v
t
t
L
L
ω
=
=
(7.11)
Equation (7.11) implies that the equation for i(t), the current as a
function of time, must be such that its slope di/dt is a sinusoidally varying
quantity, with the same phase as the source voltage and an amplitude
given by vm/L. To obtain the current, we integrate di/dt with respect to
time:
d
d d
d
i
t
t
v
L
t
t
m
∫
∫
=
sin(
)
ω
and get,
cos(
)
constant
m
v
i
t
L
= −
ω
+
ω
The integration constant has the dimension of current and is time-
independent. Since the source has an emf which oscillates symmetrically
about zero, the current it sustains also oscillates symmetrically about
zero, so that no constant or time-independent component of the current
exists. Therefore, the integration constant is zero.
Using
−
=
−




cos(
)
sin
ω
ω
t
t
π
2
, we have
i
i
t
m
=
−




sin ω
π
2
(7.12)
where  
m
m
v
i
L
= ω
is the amplitude of the current. The quantity w L is
analogous to the resistance and is called inductive reactance, denoted
by XL:
XL = w L
(7.13)
The amplitude of the current is, then
m
m
L
v
i
X
=
(7.14)
The dimension of inductive reactance is the same as that of resistance
and its SI unit is ohm (W). The inductive reactance limits the current in a
purely inductive circuit in the same way as the resistance limits the
current in a purely resistive circuit. The inductive reactance is directly
proportional to the inductance and to the frequency of the current.
A comparison of Eqs. (7.1) and (7.12) for the source voltage and the
current in an inductor shows that the current lags the voltage by p/2 or
one-quarter (1/4) cycle. Figure 7.6 (a) shows the voltage and the current
phasors in the present case at instant t1. The current phasor I is p/2
behind the voltage phasor V. When rotated with frequency w counter-
clockwise, they generate the voltage and current given by Eqs. (7.1) and
(7.12), respectively and as shown in Fig. 7.6(b).
Interactive animation on Phasor diagrams of ac circuits containing, R, L, C and RLC series circuits:
http://www.animations.physics.unsw.edu.au//jw/AC.html
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 7 :
 183
Alternating Current
 EXAMPLE 7.2
We see that the current reaches its maximum value later than the
voltage by one-fourth of a period 
T
4
2
=




π/
ω
. You have seen that an
inductor has reactance that limits current similar to resistance in a
dc circuit. Does it also consume power like a resistance? Let us try to
find out.
The instantaneous power supplied to the inductor is
p
i v
i
t
v
t
L
m
m
=
=
−




(
)
sin
sin
ω
ω
π
2 ×
(
)
(
)
cos
sin
m
m
i v
t
t
ω
ω
= −
(
)
sin 2
2
m
m
i v
t
ω
= −
So, the average power over a complete cycle is
(
)
L
sin 2
2
m
m
i v
P
t
ω
=
−
(
)
sin 2
2
m
m
i v
t
ω
= −
= 0,
since the average of sin (2wt) over a complete cycle is  zero.
Thus, the average power supplied to an inductor over one complete
cycle is zero.
Example 7.2 A pure inductor of 25.0 mH is connected to a source of
220 V. Find the inductive reactance and rms current in the circuit if
the frequency of the source is 50 Hz.
Solution The inductive reactance,
–
=
.
3
2
2
3 14
50
25
10
ν
π
×
×
×
×
Ω
L
X
L =
      = 7.85W
The rms current in the circuit is
V
A
220
28
7.85
L
V
I
X
=
=
=
Ω
FIGURE 7.6 (a) A Phasor diagram for the circuit in Fig. 7.5.
(b) Graph of v and i versus wt.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 8 :
 Physics
184
7.5   AC VOLTAGE APPLIED TO A CAPACITOR
Figure 7.7 shows an ac source e generating ac voltage v = vm sin wt
connected to a capacitor only, a purely capacitive ac circuit.
When a capacitor is connected to a voltage source
in a dc circuit, current will flow for the short time
required to charge the capacitor. As charge
accumulates on the capacitor plates, the voltage
across them increases, opposing the current. That is,
a capacitor in a dc circuit will limit or oppose the
current as it charges. When the capacitor is fully
charged, the current in the circuit falls to zero.
When the capacitor is connected to an ac source,
as in Fig. 7.7, it limits or regulates the current, but
does not completely prevent the flow of charge. The
capacitor is alternately charged and discharged as
the current reverses each half cycle. Let q  be the
charge on the capacitor at any time t. The instantaneous voltage v across
the capacitor is
q
v
C
=
(7.15)
From the Kirchhoff’s loop rule, the voltage across the source and the
capacitor are equal,
sin
m
q
v
t
C
ω
=
To find the current, we use the relation 
d
d
q
i
t
=
(
)
d
d
sin
cos(
)
m
m
i
v C
t
C v
t
t
ω
ω
ω
=
=
Using the relation, cos(
)
sin
ω
ω
t
t
=
+




π
2
, we have
i
i
t
m
=
+




sin ω
π
2
(7.16)
where the amplitude of the oscillating current is im = w Cvm. We can rewrite
it as
(1/
)
m
m
v
i
C
ω
=
Comparing it to  im= vm/R for a purely resistive circuit, we find that
(1/wC)  plays the role of resistance. It is called capacitive reactance and
is denoted by Xc,
Xc= 1/wC
(7.17)
so that the amplitude of the current is
m
m
C
v
i
X
=
(7.18)
FIGURE 7.7  An ac source
connected to a capacitor.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 9 :
 185
Alternating Current
FIGURE  7.8 (a) A Phasor diagram for the circuit
in Fig. 7.7. (b) Graph of v and i versus ωt.
The dimension of capacitive reactance is the
same as that of resistance and its SI unit is
ohm (Ω). The capacitive reactance limits the
amplitude of the current in a purely capacitive
circuit in the same way as the resistance limits
the current in a purely resistive circuit. But it
is inversely proportional to the frequency and
the capacitance.
A comparison of Eq. (7.16) with the
equation of source voltage, Eq. (7.1) shows that
the current is π/2 ahead of voltage.
Figure 7.8(a) shows the phasor diagram at an instant t1. Here the current
phasor I is π/2 ahead of the voltage phasor V as they rotate
counterclockwise. Figure 7.8(b) shows the variation of voltage and current
with time. We see that the current reaches its maximum value earlier than
the voltage by one-fourth of a period.
The instantaneous power supplied to the capacitor is
pc = i v = im cos(ωt)vm sin(ωt)
    = imvm cos(ωt) sin(ωt)
    
sin(2
)
2
m
m
i v
t
ω
=
(7.19)
So, as in the case of an inductor, the average power
sin(2
)
sin(2
)
0
2
2
m
m
m
m
C
i v
i v
P
t
t
ω
ω
=
=
=
since <sin (2ωt)> = 0 over a complete cycle.
Thus, we see that in the case of an inductor, the current lags the voltage
by π/2 and in the case of a capacitor, the current leads the voltage by π/2.
Example 7.3 A lamp is connected in series with a capacitor. Predict
your observations for dc and ac connections. What happens in each
case if the capacitance of the capacitor is reduced?
Solution When a dc source is connected to a capacitor, the capacitor
gets charged and after charging no current flows in the circuit and
the lamp will not glow. There will be no change even if C is reduced.
With ac source, the capacitor offers capacitative reactance (1/ωC)
and the current flows in the circuit. Consequently, the lamp will shine.
Reducing C will increase reactance and the lamp will shine less brightly
than before.
Example 7.4 A 15.0 µF capacitor is connected to a 220 V, 50 Hz source.
Find the capacitive reactance and the current (rms and peak) in the
circuit. If the frequency is doubled, what happens to the capacitive
reactance and the current?
Solution  The capacitive reactance is
F
6
1
1
212
2
2 (50Hz)(15.0
10
)
C
X
C
ν
−
=
=
=
Ω
π
π
×
The rms current is
 EXAMPLE 7.3
 EXAMPLE 7.4
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 10 :
 Physics
186
 EXAMPLE 7.5
 EXAMPLE 7.4
V
A
220
1.04
212
C
V
I
X
=
=
=
Ω
The peak current is
2
(1.41)(1.04
)
1.47
m
i
I
A
A
=
=
=
This current oscillates between +1.47A and –1.47 A, and is ahead of
the voltage by p/2.
If the frequency is doubled, the capacitive reactance is halved and
consequently, the current is doubled.
Example 7.5 A light bulb and an open coil inductor are connected to
an ac source through a key as shown in Fig. 7.9.
FIGURE 7.9
The switch is closed and after sometime, an iron rod is inserted into
the interior of the inductor. The glow of the light bulb (a) increases; (b)
decreases; (c) is unchanged, as the iron rod is inserted. Give your
answer with reasons.
Solution  As the iron rod is inserted, the magnetic field inside the coil
magnetizes the iron increasing the magnetic field inside it. Hence,
the inductance of the coil increases. Consequently, the inductive
reactance of the coil increases. As a result, a larger fraction of the
applied ac voltage appears across the inductor, leaving less voltage
across the bulb. Therefore, the glow of the light bulb decreases.
7.6  AC VOLTAGE APPLIED TO A SERIES  LCR CIRCUIT
Figure 7.10 shows a series LCR circuit connected to an ac source e. As
usual, we take the voltage of the source to be v = vm sin wt.
If q is the charge on the capacitor and i the
current, at time t, we have, from Kirchhoff’s loop
rule:
d
d
i
q
L
i R
v
t
C
+
+
=
(7.20)
We want to determine the instantaneous
current i and its phase relationship to the applied
alternating voltage v. We shall solve this problem
by two methods. First, we use the technique of
phasors and in the second method, we solve
Eq. (7.20) analytically to obtain the time–
dependence of i.
FIGURE 7.10 A series LCR circuit
connected to an ac source.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 11 :
 187
Alternating Current
7.6.1  Phasor-diagram solution
From the circuit shown in Fig. 7.10, we see that the resistor, inductor
and capacitor are in series. Therefore, the ac current in each element is
the same at any time, having the same amplitude and phase. Let it be
i = im sin(wt+f)
(7.21)
where f is the phase difference between the voltage across the source and
the current in the circuit. On the basis of what we have learnt in the previous
sections, we shall construct a phasor diagram for the present case.
Let I be the phasor representing the current in the circuit as given by
Eq. (7.21). Further, let VL, VR, VC, and V represent the voltage across the
inductor, resistor, capacitor and the source, respectively. From previous
section, we know that VR is parallel to I, VC is p/2
behind I and VL is  p/2 ahead of I. VL, VR, VC and I
are shown in Fig. 7.11(a) with apppropriate phase-
relations.
The length of these phasors or the amplitude
of VR, VC and VL are:
vRm = im R, vCm = im XC, vLm = im XL
(7.22)
The voltage Equation (7.20) for the circuit can
be written as
vL + vR + vC = v
(7.23)
The phasor relation whose vertical component
gives the above equation is
VL + VR + VC = V
(7.24)
This relation is represented in Fig. 7.11(b). Since
VC  and VL are always along the same line and in
opposite directions, they can be combined into a single phasor (VC + VL)
which has a magnitude ½vCm – vLm½. Since V is represented as the
hypotenuse of a right-triangle whose sides are VR and (VC + VL), the
pythagorean theorem gives:
(
)
2
2
2
m
Rm
Cm
Lm
v
v
v
v
=
+
−
Substituting the values of vRm, vCm, and vLm from Eq. (7.22) into the above
equation, we have
2
2
2
(
)
(
)
m
m
m
C
m
L
v
i R
i X
i X
=
+
−
     =
+
−


i
R
X
X
m
C
L
2
2
2
(
)
or,  
2
2
(
)
m
m
C
L
v
i
R
X
X
=
+
−
[7.25(a)]
By analogy to the resistance in a circuit, we introduce the impedance Z
in an ac circuit:
m
m
v
i
Z
=
[7.25(b)]
where 
2
2
(
)
C
L
Z
R
X
X
=
+
−
(7.26)
FIGURE 7.11 (a) Relation between the
phasors VL, VR, VC, and I, (b) Relation
between the  phasors VL, VR, and (VL + VC)
for the circuit in Fig. 7.10.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 12 :
 Physics
188
Since phasor I is always parallel to phasor VR, the phase angle f
is the angle between VR and V and can be determined from
Fig. 7.12:
tan
Cm
Lm
Rm
v
v
v
φ
−
=
Using Eq. (7.22), we have
tan
C
L
X
X
R
φ
−
=
(7.27)
Equations (7.26) and (7.27) are graphically shown in Fig. (7.12).
This is called Impedance diagram which is a right-triangle with
Z as its hypotenuse.
Equation 7.25(a) gives the amplitude of the current and Eq. (7.27)
gives the phase angle. With these, Eq. (7.21) is completely specified.
If XC > XL, f is positive and the circuit is predominantly capacitive.
Consequently, the current in the circuit leads the source voltage. If
XC < XL, f is negative and the circuit is predominantly inductive.
Consequently, the current in the circuit lags  the source voltage.
Figure 7.13 shows the phasor diagram and variation of v and i with w t
for the case XC > XL.
Thus, we have obtained the amplitude
and phase of current for an LCR series circuit
using the technique of phasors. But this
method of analysing ac circuits suffers from
certain disadvantages. First, the phasor
diagram say nothing about the initial
condition. One can take any arbitrary value
of t (say, t1, as done throughout this chapter)
and draw different phasors which show the
relative angle between different phasors.
The solution so obtained is called the
steady-state solution. This is not a general
solution. Additionally, we do have a
transient solution which exists even for
v = 0. The general solution is the sum of the
transient solution and the steady-state
solution. After a sufficiently long time, the effects of the transient solution
die out and the behaviour of the circuit is described by the steady-state
solution.
7.6.2  Resonance
An interesting characteristic of the series RLC circuit is the phenomenon
of resonance. The phenomenon of resonance is common among systems
that have a tendency to oscillate at a particular frequency. This frequency
is called the system’s natural frequency. If such a system is driven by an
energy source at a frequency that is near the natural frequency, the
amplitude of oscillation is found to be large. A familiar example of this
phenomenon is a child on a swing. The swing has a natural frequency
for swinging back and forth like a pendulum. If the child pulls on the
FIGURE 7.12  Impedance
diagram.
FIGURE 7.13 (a) Phasor diagram of V and I.
(b) Graphs of v and i versus w t for a series LCR
circuit where XC > XL.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 13 :
 189
Alternating Current
rope at regular intervals and the frequency of the pulls is almost the
same as the frequency of swinging, the amplitude of the swinging will be
large (Chapter 13, Class XI).
For an RLC circuit driven with voltage of amplitude vm and frequency
w, we found that the current amplitude is given by
2
2
(
)
m
m
m
C
L
v
v
i
Z
R
X
X
=
=
+
−
with Xc = 1/wC and XL = w L. So if w is varied, then at a particular frequency
w0, Xc = XL, and the impedance is minimum (
)
2
2
0
Z
R
R
=
+
=
. This
frequency is called the resonant frequency:
0
0
1
or
c
L
X
X
L
C
ω
ω
=
=
or   
0
1
LC
ω
=
(7.28)
At resonant frequency, the current amplitude
is maximum; im = vm/R.
Figure 7.16 shows the variation of im with w
in a RLC series circuit with L = 1.00 mH, C =
1.00 nF for two values of R: (i) R = 100 W
and (ii) R = 200 W. For the source applied vm =
100 V. w0 for this case is 
1
LC
 
   = 1.00×106
rad/s.
We see that the current amplitude is
maximum at the resonant frequency. Since im =
vm / R at resonance, the current amplitude for
case (i) is twice to that for case (ii).
Resonant circuits have a variety of applications, for example, in the
tuning  mechanism of a radio or a TV set. The antenna of a radio accepts
signals from many broadcasting stations. The signals picked up in the
antenna acts as a source in the tuning circuit of the radio, so the circuit
can be driven at many frequencies. But to hear one particular radio
station, we tune the radio. In tuning, we vary the capacitance of a
capacitor in the tuning circuit such that the resonant frequency of the
circuit becomes nearly equal to the frequency of the radio signal received.
When this happens, the amplitude of the current with the frequency of
the signal of the particular radio station in the circuit is maximum.
It is important to note that resonance phenomenon is exhibited by a
circuit only if both L and C are present in the circuit. Only then do the
voltages across L and C cancel each other (both being out of phase)
and the current amplitude is vm/R, the total source voltage appearing
across R. This means that we cannot have resonance in a RL or
RC circuit.
FIGURE 7.14 Variation of im with w for two
cases: (i) R = 100 W, (ii) R = 200 W,
L = 1.00 mH.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 14 :
 Physics
190
Example 7.6 A resistor of 200 W and a capacitor of 15.0 mF are
connected in series to a 220 V, 50 Hz ac source. (a) Calculate the
current in the circuit; (b) Calculate the voltage (rms) across the
resistor and the capacitor. Is the algebraic sum of these voltages
more than the source voltage? If yes, resolve the paradox.
Solution
Given
F
6
200
,
15.0
15.0
10
F
R
C
−
=
Ω
=
µ
=
×
220 V,
50Hz
V
ν
=
=
(a)
In order to calculate the current, we need the impedance of
the circuit. It is
2
2
2
2
(2
)
C
Z
R
X
R
C
π ν
−
=
+
=
+
   
F
2
6
2
(200
)
(2
3.14
50
15.0
10
)
−
−
=
Ω
+
×
×
×
×
   
2
2
(200
)
(212.3
)
=
Ω
+
Ω
   
291.67
=
Ω
Therefore, the current in the circuit is
V
220
0.755 A
291.5
V
I
Z
=
=
=
Ω
(b)
Since the current is the same throughout the circuit, we have
(0.755 A)(200
)
151V
R
V
I R
=
=
Ω=
(0.755 A)(212.3
)
160.3 V
C
C
V
I X
=
=
Ω=
The algebraic sum of the two voltages, VR and VC is 311.3 V which
is more than the source voltage of 220 V. How to resolve this
paradox? As you have learnt in the text, the two voltages are not
in the same phase. Therefore, they cannot be added like ordinary
numbers. The two voltages are out of phase by ninety degrees.
Therefore, the total of these voltages must be obtained using the
Pythagorean theorem:
2
2
R C
R
C
V
V
V
+
=
+
= 220 V
Thus, if the phase difference between two voltages is properly taken
into account, the total voltage across the resistor and the capacitor
is equal to the voltage of the source.
 EXAMPLE 7.6
7.7  POWER IN AC CIRCUIT: THE POWER FACTOR
We have seen that a voltage v = vm sinwt applied to a series RLC circuit
drives a current in the circuit given by i = im sin(wt + f) where
m
m
v
i
Z
=
  and φ =
−




−
tan 1
X
X
R
C
L
Therefore, the instantaneous power p supplied by the source is
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 15 :
 191
Alternating Current
(
) [
]
sin
sin(
)
m
m
p
v i
v
t
i
t
ω
ω
φ
=
=
×
+
[
]
cos
cos(2
)
2
m m
v i
t
φ
ω
φ
=
−
+
(7.29)
The average power over a cycle is given by the average of the two terms in
R.H.S. of Eq. (7.29). It is only the second term which is time-dependent.
Its average is zero (the positive half of the cosine cancels the negative
half). Therefore,
cos
2
m m
v i
P
φ
=
cos
2
2
m
m
v
i
φ
=
cos
V I
φ
=
[7.30(a)]
This can also be written as,
2
cos
P
I Z
φ
=
[7.30(b)]
So, the average power dissipated depends not only on the voltage and
current but also on the cosine of the phase angle φ between them. The
quantity cosφ is called the power factor. Let us discuss the following
cases:
Case (i) 
Case (i) 
Case (i) 
Case (i) 
Case (i) Resistive circuit: If the circuit contains only pure R, it is called
resistive. In that case φ = 0, cos φ = 1. There is maximum power dissipation.
Case (ii) 
Case (ii) 
Case (ii) 
Case (ii) 
Case (ii) Purely inductive or capacitive circuit: If the circuit contains
only an inductor or capacitor, we know that the phase difference between
voltage and current is π/2. Therefore, cos φ = 0, and no power is dissipated
even though a current is flowing in the circuit. This current is sometimes
referred to as wattless current.
Case (iii) 
Case (iii) 
Case (iii) 
Case (iii) 
Case (iii) LCR series circuit: In an LCR series circuit, power dissipated is
given by Eq. (7.30) where φ = tan–1 (Xc – XL )/ R. So,  φ may be non-zero  in
a RL or RC or RCL circuit. Even in such cases, power is dissipated only in
the resistor.
Case (iv)
Case (iv)
Case (iv)
Case (iv)
Case (iv) Power dissipated at resonance in LCR circuit: At resonance
Xc – XL= 0, and φ = 0. Therefore, cosφ = 1 and P = I 2Z = I 2 R. That is,
maximum power is dissipated in a circuit (through R) at resonance.
Example 7.7 
Example 7.7 
Example 7.7 
Example 7.7 
Example 7.7 (a) For circuits used for transporting electric power, a
low power factor implies large power loss in transmission. Explain.
(b) Power factor can often be improved by the use of a capacitor of
appropriate capacitance in the circuit. Explain.
Solution
Solution
Solution
Solution
Solution (a) We know that P = I V cosφ where cosφ is the power factor.
To supply a given power at a given voltage, if cosφ is small, we have to
increase current accordingly. But this will lead to large power loss
(I2R) in transmission.
(b)Suppose in a circuit, current I lags the voltage by an angle φ. Then
power factor cosφ =R/Z.
We can improve the power factor (tending to 1) by making Z tend to
R. Let us understand, with the help of a phasor diagram (Fig. 7.15)
 E
 E
 E
 E
 EXAMPLE
XAMPLE
XAMPLE
XAMPLE
XAMPLE 7.7
 7.7
 7.7
 7.7
 7.7
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 16 :
 Physics
192
how this can be achieved. Let us resolve I into two components. Ip
along the applied voltage V and Iq perpendicular to the applied
voltage. Iq as you have learnt in Section 7.7, is called the wattless
component since corresponding to this component of current, there
is no power loss. IP  is known as the power component because it is
in phase with the voltage and corresponds to power loss in the circuit.
It’s clear from this analysis that if we want to improve power factor,
we must completely neutralize the lagging wattless current Iq by an
equal leading wattless current I¢q. This can be done by connecting
a capacitor of appropriate value in parallel so that Iq and I¢q cancel
each other and P is effectively Ip V.
Example 7.8 A sinusoidal voltage of peak value 283 V and frequency
50 Hz is applied to a series LCR circuit in which
R = 3 W, L = 25.48 mH, and C = 796 mF. Find (a) the impedance of the
circuit; (b) the phase difference between the voltage across the source
and the current; (c) the power dissipated in the circuit; and (d) the
power factor.
Solution
(a) To find the impedance of the circuit, we first calculate XL and XC.
XL = 2 pnL
    = 2 × 3.14 × 50 × 25.48 × 10–3 W = 8 W
1
2
C
X
C
ν
=
π
6
1
4
2
3.14
50
796
10−
=
=
Ω
×
×
×
×
Therefore,
2
2
2
2
(
)
3
(8
4)
L
C
Z
R
X
X
=
+
−
=
+
−
    = 5 W
(b) Phase difference, f = tan–1
C
L
X
X
R
−
=
−



= −
°
−
tan
.
1
4
8
3
53 1
 EXAMPLE 7.8
FIGURE 7.15
 EXAMPLE 7.7
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 17 :
 193
Alternating Current
 EXAMPLE 7.9
Since f is negative, the current in the circuit lags the voltage
across the source.
(c) The power dissipated in the circuit is
2
P
I R
=
Now, I
im
=
=



=
2
1
2
283
5
40A
Therefore, 
A
W
2
(40 )
3
4800
P =
×
Ω=
(d) Power factor =


cos
cos –53.1
0.6
 
 
Example 7.9 Suppose the frequency of the source in the previous
example can be varied. (a) What is the frequency of the source at
which resonance occurs? (b) Calculate the impedance, the current,
and the power dissipated at the resonant condition.
Solution
(a) The frequency at which the resonance occurs is
0
3
6
1
1
25.48
10
796
10
LC
ω
−
−
=
=
×
×
×
     
222.1rad/s
=
0
221.1 Hz
35.4Hz
2
2
3.14
r
ω
ν =
=
=
π
×
(b) The impedance Z at resonant condition is equal to the resistance:
3
Z
R
=
=
Ω
The rms current at resonance is
=
=
= 



=
V
Z
V
R
283
2
1
3
66 7
. A
The power dissipated at resonance is
2
2
(66.7)
3
13.35 kW
P
I
R
=
×
=
×
=
You can see that in the present case, power dissipated
at resonance is more than the power dissipated in Example 7.8.
 EXAMPLE 7.8
 EXAMPLE 7.10
Example 7.10 At an airport, a person is made to walk through the
doorway of a metal detector, for security reasons. If she/he is carrying
anything made of metal, the metal detector emits a sound. On what
principle does this detector work?
Solution  The metal detector works on the principle of resonance in
ac circuits. When you walk through a metal detector, you are,
in fact, walking through a coil of many turns. The coil is connected to
a capacitor tuned so that the circuit is in resonance. When
you walk through with metal in your pocket, the impedance of the
circuit changes – resulting in significant change in current in the
circuit. This change in current is detected and the electronic circuitry
causes a sound to be emitted as an alarm.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 18 :
 Physics
194
7.8  TRANSFORMERS
For many purposes, it is necessary to change (or transform) an alternating
voltage from one to another of greater or smaller value. This is done with
a device called transformer using the principle of mutual induction.
A transformer consists of two sets of coils, insulated from each other.
They are wound on a soft-iron core, either one on top of the other as in
Fig. 7.16(a) or on separate limbs of the core as in Fig. 7.16(b). One of the
coils called the primary coil has Np turns. The other coil is called the
secondary coil; it has Ns turns. Often the primary coil is the input coil
and the secondary coil is the output coil of the transformer.
FIGURE 7.16 Two arrangements for winding of primary and secondary coil in a transformer:
(a) two coils on top of each other, (b) two coils on separate limbs of the core.
When an alternating voltage is applied to the  primary, the resulting
current produces an alternating magnetic flux which links the secondary
and induces an emf in it. The value of this emf depends on the number of
turns in the secondary. We consider an ideal transformer in which the
primary has negligible resistance and all the flux in the core links both
primary and secondary windings. Let f be the flux in each turn in the core
at time t due to current in the primary when a voltage vp is applied to it.
Then the induced emf or voltage es, in the secondary with Ns turns is
d
d
s
s
N
t
φ
ε
= −
(7.31)
The alternating flux f also induces an emf, called back emf in the
primary. This is
d
d
p
p
N
t
φ
ε
= −
(7.32)
But ep = vp. If this were not so, the primary current would be infinite
since the  primary has zero resistance (as assumed). If the secondary is
an open circuit or the current taken from it is small, then to a good
approximation
es = vs
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 19 :
 195
Alternating Current
where  vs is the voltage across the secondary. Therefore, Eqs. (7.31) and
(7.32) can be written as
s
s
d
v
N
d t
φ
= −
[7.31(a)]
p
p
d
v
N
d t
φ
= −
[7.32(a)]
From Eqs. [7.31 (a)] and [7.32 (a)], we have
s
s
p
p
v
N
v
N
=
(7.33)
Note that the above relation has been obtained using three
assumptions: (i) the primary resistance and current are small; (ii) the
same flux links both the primary and the secondary as very little flux
escapes from the core, and (iii) the secondary current is small.
If the transformer is assumed to be 100% efficient (no energy losses),
the power input is equal to the power output, and since p = i v,
ipvp = isvs
(7.34)
Although some energy is always lost, this is a good approximation,
since a well designed transformer may have an efficiency of more than
95%. Combining Eqs. (7.33) and (7.34), we have
p
s
s
s
p
p
i
v
N
i
v
N
=
=
(7.35)
Since i and v both oscillate with the same frequency as the ac source,
Eq. (7.35) also gives the ratio of the amplitudes or rms values of
corresponding quantities.
Now, we can see how a transformer affects the voltage and current.
We have:
V
N
N
V
s
s
p
p
=




   and  I
N
N
I
s
p
s
p
= 



(7.36)
That is, if the secondary coil has a greater number of turns than the
primary (Ns > Np), the voltage is stepped up (Vs > Vp). This type of
arrangement is called a step-up transformer. However, in this arrangement,
there is less current in the secondary than in the primary (Np/Ns < 1 and Is
< Ip). For example, if the primary coil of a transformer has 100 turns and
the secondary has 200 turns,  Ns/Np = 2 and Np/Ns=1/2. Thus, a 220V
input at 10A will step-up to 440 V output at 5.0 A.
If the secondary coil has less turns than the primary (Ns < Np),
we have a step-down transformer. In this case, Vs < Vp and Is > Ip. That
is, the voltage is stepped down, or reduced, and the current
is increased.
The equations obtained above apply to ideal transformers (without
any energy losses). But in actual transformers, small energy losses do
occur due to the following reasons:
(i) Flux Leakage: There is always some flux leakage; that is, not all of
the flux due to primary passes through the secondary due to poor
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 20 :
 Physics
196
SUMMARY
1.
An alternating voltage 
sin
=
ω
m
v
v
t  applied to a resistor R drives a
current i = im sinwt in the resistor, 
m
m
v
i
R
=
. The current is in phase with
the applied voltage.
2.
For an alternating current i = im sin wt passing through a resistor R, the
average power loss P (averaged over a cycle) due to joule heating is
( 1/2 )i 2
mR. To express it in the same form as the dc power (P = I 2R), a
special value of current is used. It is called root mean square (rms)
current and is donoted by I:
0.707
2
m
m
i
I
i
=
=
Similarly, the rms voltage is defined by
0.707
2
m
m
v
V
v
=
=
We have P = IV = I 2R
3.
An ac voltage v = vm sin wt applied to a pure inductor L, drives a current
in the inductor i = im sin (wt – p/2), where im = vm/XL. XL = wL is called
inductive reactance. The current in the inductor lags the voltage by
p/2. The average power supplied to an inductor over one complete cycle
is zero.
design of the core or the air gaps in the core. It can be reduced by
winding the primary and secondary coils one over the other.
(ii) Resistance of the windings: The wire used for the windings has some
resistance and so, energy is lost due to heat produced in the wire
(I 2R). In high current, low voltage windings, these are minimised by
using thick wire.
(iii) Eddy currents: The alternating magnetic flux induces eddy currents
in the iron core and causes heating. The effect is reduced by using a
laminated core.
(iv) Hysteresis: The magnetisation of the core is repeatedly reversed by
the alternating magnetic field. The resulting expenditure of energy in
the core appears as heat and is kept to a minimum by using a magnetic
material which has a low hysteresis loss.
The large scale transmission and distribution of electrical energy over
long distances is done with the use of transformers. The voltage output
of the generator is stepped-up (so that current is reduced and
consequently, the I 2R loss is cut down). It is then transmitted over long
distances to an area sub-station near the consumers. There the voltage
is stepped down. It is further stepped down at distributing sub-stations
and utility poles before a power supply of 240 V reaches our homes.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 21 :
 197
Alternating Current
4.
An ac voltage v = vm sinwt applied to a capacitor drives a current in the
capacitor: i = im sin (wt + p/2). Here,
1
,
m
m
C
C
v
i
X
X
C
ω
=
=
 is called capacitive reactance.
The current through the capacitor is p/2 ahead of the applied voltage.
As in the case of inductor, the average power supplied to a capacitor
over one complete cycle is zero.
5.
For a series RLC circuit driven by voltage v = vm sin wt, the current is
given by i = im sin (wt + f)
where
(
)
2
2
m
m
C
L
v
i
R
X
X
=
+
−
and
1
tan
C
L
X
X
R
φ
−
−
=
(
)
2
2
C
L
Z
R
X
X
=
+
−
 is called the impedance of the circuit.
The average power loss over a complete cycle is given by
P = V I cosf
The term cosf is called the power factor.
6.
In a purely inductive or capacitive circuit, cosf = 0 and no power is
dissipated even though a current is flowing in the circuit. In such cases,
current is referred to as a wattless current.
7.
The phase relationship between current and voltage in an ac circuit
can be shown conveniently by representing voltage and current by
rotating vectors called phasors. A phasor is a vector which rotates
about the origin with angular speed w. The magnitude of a phasor
represents the amplitude or peak value of the quantity (voltage or
current) represented by the phasor.
The analysis of an ac circuit is facilitated by the use of a phasor
diagram.
8.
A transformer consists of an iron core on which are bound a primary
coil of Np turns and a secondary coil of Ns turns. If the primary coil is
connected to an ac source, the primary and secondary voltages are
related by
V
N
N
V
s
s
p
p
=




and the currents are related by
I
N
N
I
s
p
s
p
= 



If the secondary coil has a greater number of turns than the primary, the
voltage is stepped-up (Vs > Vp). This type of arrangement is called a step-
up transformer. If the secondary coil has turns less than the primary, we
have a step-down transformer.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 22 :
 Physics
198
 Physical quantity
Symbol
Dimensions
Unit
Remarks
rms voltage
V
[M L
2 T
–3 A
–1]
V
V 
= 
2
m
v
, 
v m 
is 
the
amplitude of the ac voltage.
rms current
I
[
 A]
A
I = 
2
m
i
, im is the amplitude of
the ac current.
Reactance:
     Inductive
XL
[M
 L
2 T
–3 A
–2]
XL = L
     Capacitive
XC
[M
 L
2 T
–3 A
–2]
XC = 1/C
Impedance
Z
[M
 L
2 T
–3 A
–2]
Depends 
on 
elements
present in the circuit.
Resonant
wr or w0
[T
–1]
Hz
w0 
LC
1

 for a
frequency
series RLC circuit
Quality factor
Q
Dimensionless
0
0
1
L
Q
R
C R
ω
ω
=
=
 for a series
RLC circuit.
Power factor
Dimensionless
= 
cosf, 
f 
is 
the 
phase
difference 
between 
voltage
applied 
and 
current 
in
the circuit.
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
When a value is given for ac voltage or current, it is ordinarily the rms
value. The voltage across the terminals of an outlet in your room is
normally 240 V. This refers to the rms value of the voltage. The amplitude
of this voltage is
V
2
2(240)
340
m
v
V
=
=
=
2.
The power rating of an element used in ac circuits refers to its average
power rating.
3.
The power consumed in an ac circuit is never negative.
4.
Both alternating current and direct current are measured in amperes.
But how is the ampere defined for an alternating current? It cannot be
derived from the mutual attraction of two parallel wires carrying ac
currents, as the dc ampere is derived. An ac current changes direction
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 23 :
 199
Alternating Current
with the source frequency and the attractive force would average to
zero. Thus, the ac ampere must be defined in terms of some property
that is independent of the direction of the current. Joule heating
is such a property, and there is one ampere of rms value of
alternating current in a circuit if the current produces the same
average heating effect as one ampere of dc current would produce
under the same conditions.
5.
In an ac circuit, while adding voltages across different elements, one
should take care of their phases properly. For example, if VR and VC
are voltages across R and C, respectively in an RC circuit, then the
total voltage across RC combination is 
2
2
RC
R
C
V
V
V
=
+
 and not
VR + VC since VC is p/2 out of phase of VR.
6.
Though in a phasor diagram, voltage and current are represented by
vectors, these quantities are not really vectors themselves. They are
scalar quantities. It so happens that the amplitudes and phases of
harmonically varying scalars combine mathematically in the same
way as do the projections of rotating vectors of corresponding
magnitudes and directions. The ‘rotating vectors’ that represent
harmonically varying scalar quantities are introduced only to provide
us with a simple way of adding these quantities using a rule that
we already know as the law of vector addition.
7.
There are no power losses associated with pure capacitances and pure
inductances in an ac circuit. The only element that dissipates energy
in an ac circuit is the resistive element.
8.
In a RLC circuit, resonance phenomenon occur when XL = XC or
0
1
LC
ω
=
. For resonance to occur, the presence of both L and C
elements in the circuit is a must. With only one of these (L or C )
elements, there is no possibility of voltage cancellation and hence,
no resonance is possible.
9.
The power factor in a RLC circuit is a measure of how close the
circuit is to expending the maximum power.
10. In generators and motors, the roles of input and output are
reversed. In a motor, electric energy is the input and mechanical
energy is the output. In a generator, mechanical energy is the
input and electric energy is the output. Both devices simply
transform energy from one form to another.
11. A transformer (step-up) changes a low-voltage into a high-voltage.
This does not violate the law of conservation of energy. The
current is reduced by the same proportion.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_1 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 24 :
 Physics
200
EXERCISES
7.1
A 100 W resistor is connected to a 220 V, 50 Hz ac supply.
(a) What is the rms value of current in the circuit?
(b) What is the net power consumed over a full cycle?
7.2
(a) The peak voltage of an ac supply is 300 V. What is the rms voltage?
(b) The rms value of current in an ac circuit is 10 A. What is the
peak current?
7.3
A 44 mH inductor is connected to 220 V, 50 Hz ac supply. Determine
the rms value of the current in the circuit.
7.4
 A 60 mF capacitor is connected to a 110 V, 60 Hz ac supply. Determine
the rms value of the current in the circuit.
7.5
In Exercises 7.3 and 7.4, what is the net power absorbed by each
circuit over a complete cycle. Explain your answer.
7.6
A charged 30 mF capacitor is connected to a 27 mH inductor. What is
the angular frequency of free oscillations of the circuit?
7.7
A series LCR circuit with R = 20 W, L = 1.5 H and C = 35 mF is connected
to a variable-frequency 200 V ac supply. When the frequency of the
supply equals the natural frequency of the circuit, what is the average
power transferred to the circuit in one complete cycle?
7.8
Figure 7.17 shows a series LCR circuit connected to a variable
frequency 230 V source. L = 5.0 H, C = 80mF, R = 40 W.
(a) Determine the source frequency which drives the circuit in
resonance.
(b) Obtain the impedance of the circuit and the amplitude of current
at the resonating frequency.
(c) Determine the rms potential drops across the three elements of
the circuit. Show that the potential drop across the LC
combination is zero at the resonating frequency.
FIGURE 7.17
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 1 :
 300
PHYSICS
Chapter   8
8.1
1.8
8.2
(a) From the given graph for a stress of 150 × 106 N m–2 the strain is 0.002
(b) Approximate yield strength of the material is 3 × 108 N m–2
8.3
(a) Material A
(b) Strength of a material is determined by the amount of stress required to cause
 fracture: material A is stronger than material B.
8.4
(a) False
 (b) True
8.5
1.5 × 10–4 m (steel); 1.3 × 10–4 m (brass)
8.6
Deflection = 4 × 10–6 m
8.7
2.8 × 10–6
8.8
0.127
8.9
7.07 × 10
4 N
8.10
Dcopper/Diron = 1.25
8.11
1.539 × 10–4 m
8.12
2.026 × 109 Pa
8.13
1.034 × 103 kg/m3
8.14
0.0027
8.15
0.058 cm3
8.16
2.2 × 106 N/m2
 ANSWERS
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 2 :
 ANSWERS
301
Chapter   9
9.3
(a) decreases (b) η of gases increases, η of liquid decreases with temperature (c) shear
strain, rate of shear strain (d) conservation of mass, Bernoulli’s equation (e) greater.
9.5
 6.2 × 106 Pa
9.6
 10.5 m
19.7
Pressure at that depth in the sea is about 3 × 107 Pa. The structure is suitable since it
can withstand far greater pressure or stress.
9.8
6.92 × 105 Pa
9.9
0.800
9.10
Mercury will rise in the arm containing spirit; the difference in levels of mercury will be
0.221 cm.
9.11
No, Bernoulli’s principle applies to streamline flow only.
9.12
No, unless the atmospheric pressures at the two points where Bernoulli’s equation is
applied are significantly different.
9.13
9.8 × 102 Pa (The Reynolds number is about 0.3 so the flow is laminar).
9.14
1.5 × 103 N
9.15
Fig (a) is incorrect [Reason: at a constriction (i.e. where the area of cross-section of the
tube is smaller), flow speed is larger due to mass conservation. Consequently pressure
there is smaller according to Bernoulli’s equation. We assume the fluid to be
incompressible].
9.16
0.64 m s–1
9.17
2.5 × 10–2 N m–1
9.18
4.5 × 10–2  N for (b) and (c), the same as in (a).
9.19
Excess pressure = 310 Pa, total pressure = 1.0131 × 105 Pa. However, since data are
correct to three significant figures, we should write total pressure inside the drop as
1.01 × 105 Pa.
9.20
Excess pressure inside the soap bubble = 20.0 Pa; excess pressure inside the air bubble
in soap solution = 10.0 Pa. Outside pressure for air bubble = 1.01 × 105 + 0.4 × 103 × 9.8
× 1.2 = 1.06 × 105 Pa. The excess pressure is so small that up to three significant
figures, total pressure inside the air bubble is 1.06 × 105 Pa.
Chapter   10
10.1
Neon:  – 248.58 °C  = – 415.44 °F;
CO2:  – 56.60 °C  =  – 69.88 °F
(use  tF  =  
32
5
9
c +
t
)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 3 :
 302
PHYSICS
10.2
TA  = ( 4/7)  TB
10.3
384.8 K
10.4
(a) Triple-point has a unique temperature; fusion point and boiling point temperatures
depend on pressure; (b) The other fixed point is the absolute zero itself; (c) Triple-point
is 0.01°C, not 0 °C; (d)  491.69.
10.5
(a)  TA  =  392.69 K, TB =  391.98 K;  (b) The discrepancy arises because the gases are not
perfectly ideal. To reduce the discrepancy, readings should be taken for lower and
lower pressures and the plot between temperature measured versus absolute pressure
of the gas at triple point should be extrapolated to obtain temperature in the limit
pressure tends to zero, when the gases approach ideal gas behaviour.
10.6
Actual length of the rod at 45.0 °C = (63.0 + 0.0136) cm = 63.0136 cm.  (However, we
should say that change in length up to three significant figures is 0.0136 cm, but the
total length is 63.0 cm, up to three significant places. Length of the same rod at 27.0 °C
=  63.0 cm.
10.7
When the shaft is cooled to temperature – 690C the wheel can slip on the shaft.
10.8
The diameter increases by an amount = 1.44 × 10–2 cm.
10.9
3.8 × 102 N
10.10 Since the ends of the combined rod are not clamped, each rod expands freely.
∆lbrass =  0.21  cm, ∆lsteel  =  0.126 cm  =  0.13 cm
Total change in length = 0.34 cm. No ‘thermal stress’ is developed at the junction since
the rods freely expand.
10.11 0.0147  =  1.5 × 10– 2
10.12 103 °C
10.13 1.5 kg
10.14 0.43 J g –1 K–1 ; smaller
10.15 The gases are diatomic, and have other degrees of freedom (i.e. have other modes of
motion) possible besides the translational degrees of freedom. To raise the temperature
of the gas by a certain amount, heat is to be supplied to increase the average energy of
all the modes. Consequently, molar specific heat of diatomic  gases is more than that of
monatomic gases. It can be shown that if only rotational modes of motion are considered,
the molar specific heat of diatomic gases is nearly (5/2) R which agrees with the
observations for all the gases listed in the table, except chlorine. The higher value of
molar specific heat of chlorine indicates that besides rotational modes, vibrational modes
are also present in chlorine at room temperature.
10.16 4.3 g/min
10.17 3.7 kg
10.18 238 °C
10.20 9 min
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 4 :
 ANSWERS
303
Chapter   11
11.1
16 g per min
11.2
934 J
11.4
2.64
11.5
16.9 J
11.6
(a) 0.5 atm (b) zero (c) zero (assuming the gas to be ideal) (d) No, since the process
(called free expansion) is rapid and cannot be controlled. The intermediate states are
non-equilibrium states and do not satisfy the gas equation. In due course, the gas
does return to an equilibrium state.
11.7
25 W
11.8
450 J
Chapter   12
12.1
4 × 10–4
12.3
(a)  The dotted plot corresponds to ‘ideal’ gas behaviour;  (b) T1 > T2; (c) 0.26 J K–1;
(d) No, 6.3 × 10–5 kg  of H2 would yield the same value
12.4
0.14  kg
12.5
5.3 × 10–6   m3
12.6
6.10 × 1026
12.7
(a)  6.2 × 10–21 J
(b)  1.24 × 10–19 J                 (c) 2.1 × 10–16 J
12.8
Yes, according to Avogadro’s law.  No, vrms is largest for the lightest of the three gases;
neon.
12.9
2.52 × 103 K
12.10 Use the formula for mean free path :
=
π
2
1
2
l
nd
where d is the diameter of a molecule.  For the given pressure and temperature
N/V = 5.10 × 1025 m–3 and   = 1.0 × 10–7 m.  vrms = 5.1 × 102 m s–1.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 5 :
 304
PHYSICS
collisional frequency = 
9
–1
rms
5.1
10 s
v
l
=
×
. Time taken for the collision = d / vrms  = 4 × 10–13 s.
Time taken between successive collisions = l / vrms = 2 × 10-10 s. Thus the time taken
between successive collisions is 500 times the time taken for a collision. Thus a molecule
in a gas moves essentially free for most of the time.
Chapter   13
13.1
(b), (c)
13.2
(b) and (c): SHM; (a) and (d) represent periodic but not SHM [A polyatomic molecule has a
number of natural frequencies; so in general, its vibration is a superposition of SHM’s of
a number of different frequencies. This superposition is periodic but not SHM].
13.3
(b) and (d) are periodic, each with a period of 2 s; (a) and (c) are not periodic. [Note in (c),
repetition of merely one position is not enough for motion to be periodic; the entire
motion during one period must be repeated successively].
13.4
(a) Simple harmonic, T = (2π/ω); (b) periodic, T =(2π/ω) but not simple harmonic;
(c) simple harmonic, T = (π/ω); (d) periodic, T = (2π/ω) but not simple harmonic;
(e) non-periodic; (f) non-periodic (physically not acceptable as the function → ∞ as t → ∞.
13.5
(a) 0, +, + ; (b) 0, –, – ; (c) –, 0,0 ;  (d) –, –, – ;  (e) +, +, + ;   (f ) –, –, –.
13.6
(c) represents a simple harmonic motion.
13.7
A = 2  cm, φ = 7π/4; B = 2  cm, a = π/4.
13.8
219 N
13.9
Frequency 3.2 s–1; maximum acceleration of the mass 8.0 m s–2; maximum speed of the
mass 0.4 m s–1.
13.10 (a)
x = 2 sin 20t
(b)
x = 2 cos 20t
(c)
x = – 2 cos 20t
where x is in cm. These functions differ neither in amplitude nor frequency.
They differ in initial phase.
13.11 (a)
x = – 3 sin πt where x is in cm.
(b)
x = – 2 cos π
2 t  where x is in cm.
13.13 (a)
F/k for both (a) and (b).
(b)
T = 2π
m
k for (a) and 2π
k
m
2
 for (b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 6 :
 ANSWERS
305
13.14 100 m/min
13.15 8.4 s
13.16
 
π
+
2
4
2
T = 2
g
/
l
v
R
 . Hint: Effective acceleration due to gravity will get reduced
due to radial acceleration v2/R acting in the horizontal plane.
13.17 In equilibrium, weight of the cork equals the up thrust. When the cork is depressed
by an amount x, the net upward force is Axρl g. Thus the force constant k = Aρl g .
Using m = Ahρ, and T = 2π
k
m  one gets the given expression.
13.18 When both the ends are open to the atmosphere, and the difference in levels of the
liquid in the two arms is h, the net force on the liquid column is Ahρg where A is the
area of cross-section of the tube and ρ is the density of the liquid. Since restoring force
is proportional to h, motion is simple harmonic.
Chapter  14
14.1
0.5 s
14.2
8.7 s
14.3
2.06 × 104 N
14.4
Assume ideal gas law: P = ρRT
M
, where ρ is the density, M is the molecular mass, and
T is the temperature of the gas. This gives v =
RT
M
γ
. This shows that v is:
(a)
Independent of pressure.
(b)
Increases as T .
(c)
The molecular mass of water (18) is less than that of N2 (28) and O2 (32).
Therefore as humidity increases, the effective molecular mass of air decreases
and hence v increases.
14.5
The converse is not true. An obvious requirement for an acceptable function for a
travelling wave is that it should be finite everywhere and at all times. Only function (c)
satisfies this condition, the remaining functions cannot possibly represent a travelling
wave.
14.6
(a)    3.4 × 10–4 m
(b)    1.49 ××10–3 m
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 7 :
 306
PHYSICS
14.7
4.1 × 10–4 m
14.8
(a)
A travelling wave. It travels from right to left with a speed of 20 ms–1.
(b)
3.0 cm, 5.7 Hz
(c)
π/4
(d)
3.5 m
14.9
All the graphs are sinusoidal. They have same amplitude and frequency, but
different initial phases.
14.10 (a)
6.4 π rad
(b)   0.8 π rad
(c)
π rad
(d)
(π/2) rad
14.11 (a)
Stationary wave
(b)
l = 3 m, n = 60 Hz, and v = 180 m s–1 for each wave
(c )
648 N
14.12 (a)
All the points except the nodes on the string have the same frequency and
phase, but not the same amplitude.
(b)
0.042 m
14.13 (a)
Stationary wave.
(b)
Unacceptable function for any wave.
(c)
Travelling harmonic wave.
(d)
Superposition of two stationary waves.
14.14 (a)
79 m s–1
(b)
248 N
14.15 347 m s–1
Hint : vn = 
l
v)
n
(
4
1
2 −
 ; n = 1,2,3,….for a pipe with one end closed
14.16 5.06 km s–1
14.17 First harmonic (fundamental); No.
14.18 318 Hz
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 8 :
 ANSWERS
307
BIBLIOGRAPHY
TEXTBOOKS
For additional reading on the topics covered in this book, you may like to consult one or
more of the following books. Some of these books however are more advanced and contain
many more topics than this book.
1.
Ordinary Level Physics, A.F. Abbott, Arnold-Heinemann (1984).
2.
Advanced Level Physics, M. Nelkon and P. Parker, 6th Edition Arnold-
Heinemann (1987).
3.
Advanced Physics, Tom Duncan, John Murray (2000).
4.
Fundamentals of Physics, David Halliday, Robert Resnick and Jearl
Walker, 7th Edition John Wily (2004).
5.
University Physics, H.D. Young, M.W. Zemansky and F.W. Sears, Narosa
Pub. House (1982).
6.
Problems in Elementary Physics, B. Bukhovtsa, V. Krivchenkov,
G. Myakishev and V. Shalnov, MIR Publishers, (1971).
7.
Lectures on Physics (3 volumes), R.P. Feynman, Addision – Wesley (1965).
8.
Berkeley Physics Course (5 volumes) McGraw Hill (1965).
a.
Vol. 1 – Mechanics: (Kittel, Knight and Ruderman)
b.
Vol. 2 – Electricity and Magnetism (E.M. Purcell)
c.
Vol. 3 – Waves and Oscillations (Frank S. Craw-ford)
d.
Vol. 4 – Quantum Physics (Wichmann)
e.
Vol. 5 – Statistical Physics (F. Reif)
9.
Fundamental University Physics, M. Alonso and E. J. Finn, Addison –
Wesley (1967).
10.
College Physics, R.L. Weber, K.V. Manning, M.W. White and G.A. Weygand,
Tata McGraw Hill (1977).
11.
Physics: Foundations and Frontiers, G. Gamow and J.M. Cleveland, Tata
McGraw Hill (1978).
12.
Physics for the Inquiring Mind, E.M. Rogers, Princeton University
Press (1960)
13.
PSSC Physics Course, DC Heath and Co. (1965) Indian Edition, NCERT
(1967)
14.
Physics Advanced Level, Jim Breithampt, Stanley Thornes Publishers
(2000).
15.
Physics, Patrick Fullick, Heinemann (2000).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 9 :
 16.
Conceptual Physics, Paul G. Hewitt, Addision-Wesley (1998).
17.
College Physics, Raymond A. Serway and Jerry S. Faughn, Harcourt Brace
and Co. (1999).
18.
University Physics, Harris Benson, John Wiley (1996).
19.
University Physics, William P. Crummet and Arthur B. Western, Wm.C.
Brown (1994).
20.
General Physics, Morton M. Sternheim and Joseph W. Kane, John Wiley
(1988).
21.
Physics, Hans C. Ohanian, W.W. Norton (1989).
22.
Advanced Physics, Keith Gibbs, Cambridge University Press(1996).
23.
Understanding Basic Mechanics, F. Reif, John Wiley (1995).
24.
College Physics, Jerry D. Wilson and Anthony J. Buffa, Prentice-Hall (1997).
25.
Senior Physics, Part – I, I.K. Kikoin and A.K. Kikoin, Mir Publishers (1987).
26.
Senior Physics, Part – II, B. Bekhovtsev, Mir Publishers (1988).
27.
Understanding Physics, K. Cummings, Patrick J. Cooney, Priscilla W.
Laws and Edward F. Redish, John Wiley (2005)
28.
Essentials of Physics, John D. Cutnell and Kenneth W. Johnson, John
Wiley (2005)
GENERAL BOOKS
For instructive and entertaining general reading on science, you may like to read some of
the following books. Remember however, that many of these books are written at a level far
beyond the level of the present book.
1.
Mr. Tompkins in paperback, G. Gamow, Cambridge University Press (1967).
2.
The Universe and Dr. Einstein, C. Barnett, Time Inc. New York (1962).
3.
Thirty years that Shook Physics, G. Gamow, Double Day, New York (1966).
4.
Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman, R.P. Feynman, Bantam books (1986).
5.
One, Two, Three…  Infinity, G. Gamow, Viking Inc. (1961).
6.
The Meaning of Relativity, A. Einstein, (Indian Edition) Oxford and IBH
Pub. Co (1965).
7.
Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature, Niels Bohr, Cambridge
(1934).
8.
The Physical Principles of Quantum Theory, W. Heisenberg, University
of Chicago Press (1930).
9.
The Physics- Astronomy Frontier, F. Hoyle and J.V. Narlikar, W.H.
Freeman (1980).
10.
The Flying Circus of Physics with Answer, J. Walker, John Wiley and
Sons (1977).
11.
Physics for Everyone (series), L.D. Landau and A.I. Kitaigorodski, MIR
Publisher (1978).
Book 1: Physical Bodies
Book 2: Molecules
Book 3: Electrons
Book 4: Photons and Nuclei.
12.
Physics can be Fun, Y. Perelman, MIR Publishers (1986).
13.
Power of Ten, Philip Morrison and Eames, W.H. Freeman (1985).
14.
Physics in your Kitchen Lab., I.K. Kikoin, MIR Publishers (1985).
15.
How Things Work : The Physics of Everyday Life, Louis A. Bloomfield,
John Wiley (2005)
16.
Physics Matters : An Introduction to Conceptual Physics, James Trefil
and Robert M. Hazen, John Wiley (2004).
PHYSICS
308
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 10 :
 A
Absolute scale temperature
280
Absolute zero
280
Acceleration (linear)
45
Acceleration due to gravity
49,189
Accuracy
22
Action-reaction
97
Addition of vectors
67
Adiabatic process
311, 312
Aerofoil
262
Air resistance
79
Amplitude
344, 372
Angle of contact
267, 268
Angstrom
21
Angular Acceleration
154
Angular displacement
342
Angular frequency
344, 373
Angular momentum
155
Angular velocity
152
Angular wave number
372
Antinodes
381,382
Archimedes Principle
255
Area expansion
281
Atmospheric pressure
253
Average acceleration
45, 74
Average speed
42
Average velocity
42
Avogardo's law
325
B
Banked road
104
Barometer
254
Beat frequency
383
Beats
382, 383
Bending of beam
244
Bernoulli's Principle
258
Blood pressure
276
Boiling point
287
Boyle's law
326
Buckling
244
INDEX
Bulk modulus
242
Buoyant force
255
C
Calorimeter
285
Capillary rise
268
Capillary waves
370
Carnot engine
316
Central forces
186
Centre of Gravity
161
Centre of mass
144
Centripetal acceleration
81
Centripetal force
104
Change of state
287
Charle's law
326
Chemical Energy
126
Circular motion
104
Clausius statement
315
Coefficient of area expansion
283
Coefficient of linear expansion
281
Coefficient of performance
314
Coefficient of static friction
101
Coefficient of viscosity
262
Coefficient of volume expansion
281
Cold reservoir
313
Collision
129
Collision in two dimensions
131
Compressibility
242, 243
Compressions
368, 369, 374
Compressive stress
236, 243
Conduction
290
Conservation laws
12
Conservation of angular momentum
157, 173
Conservation of Mechanical Energy
121
Conservation of momentum
98
Conservative force
121
Constant acceleration
46,75
Contact force
100
Convection
293
Couple
159
Crest
371
Cyclic process
312
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 11 :
 D
Dalton's law of partial pressure
325
Damped oscillations
355
Damped simple Harmonic motion
355
Damping constant
355
Damping force
355
Derived units
16
Detergent action
269
Diastolic pressure
277
Differential calculus
61
Dimensional analysis
32
Dimensions
31
Displacement vector
66
Displacement
40
Doppler effect
385, 386
Doppler shift
387
Driving frequency
358
Dynamics of rotational motion
169
E
Efficiency of heat engine
313
Elastic Collision
129
Elastic deformation
236, 238
Elastic limit
238
Elastic moduli
239
Elasticity
235
Elastomers
239
Electromagnetic force
8
Energy
117
Equality of vectors
66
Equation of continuity
257
Equilibrium of a particle
99
Equilibrium of Rigid body
158
Equilibrium position
341, 342, 353
Errors in measurement
22
Escape speed
193
F
First law of Thermodynamics
307
Fluid pressure
251
Force
94
Forced frequency
357
Forced oscillations
357, 358
Fracture point
238
Free Fall
49
Free-body diagram
100
Frequency of periodic motion
342, 372
Friction
101
Fundamental Forces
6
Fundamental mode
381
Fusion
287
G
Gauge pressure
253
Geocentric model
183
Geostationary satellite
196
Gravitational constant
189
Gravitational Force
8, 192
Gravitational potential energy
191
Gravity waves
370
H
Harmonic frequency
380, 381
Harmonics
380, 381
Heat capacity
284
Heat engines
313
Heat pumps
313
Heat
279
Heliocentric model
183
Hertz
343
Hooke's law
238
Horizontal range
78
Hot reservoir
313
Hydraulic brakes
255, 256
Hydraulic lift
255, 256
Hydraulic machines
255
Hydraulic pressure
238
Hydraulic stress
238, 243
Hydrostatic paradox
253
I
Ideal gas equation
280
Ideal gas
280, 325
Impulse
96
Inelastic collision
129
Initial phase angle
372
Instantaneous acceleration
74
Instantaneous speed
45
Instantaneous velocity
43
Interference
377
Internal energy
306, 330
Irreversible engine
315, 317
Irreversible processes
315
Isobaric process
311, 312
Isochoric process
311, 312
Isotherm
310
Isothermal process
311
K
Kelvin-Planck statement
315
Kepler's laws of planetary motion
184
Kinematics of Rotational Motion
167
Kinematics
39
Kinetic energy of rolling motion
174
Kinetic Energy
117
Kinetic interpretation of temperature
329
Kinetic theory of gases
328
L
Laminar flow
258, 264
Laplace correction
376
310
PHYSICS
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 12 :
 Latent heat of fusion
290
Latent heat of vaporisation
290
Latent heat
289
Law of cosine
72
Law of equipartition of energy
332
Law of Inertia
90
Law of sine
72
Linear expansion
281
Linear harmonic oscillator
349, 351
Linear momentum
155
Longitudinal strain
236
Longitudinal strain
236, 239
Longitudinal stress
236
Longitudinal Wave
369, 376
M
Magnus effect
261
Manometer
254
Mass Energy Equivalence
126
Maximum height of projectile
78
Maxwell Distribution
331
Mean free path
324, 335
Measurement of length
18
Measurement of mass
21
Measurement of temperature
279
Measurement of time
22
Melting point
286
Modes
380
Modulus of elasticity
238
Modulus of rigidity
242
Molar specific heat capacity
284, 308
at constant pressure
Molar specific heat capacity
284, 308
at constant volume
Molar specific heat capacity
284
Molecular nature of matter
323
Moment of Inertia
163
Momentum
93
Motion in a plane
72
Multiplication of vectors
67
Musical instruments
384
N
Natural frequency
358
Newton's first law of motion
91
Newton's Law of cooling
295
Newton's law of gravitation
185
Newton's second law of motion
93
Newton's third law of motion
96
Newtons' formula for speed of sound
377
Nodes
381
Normal Modes
381, 382, 384
Note
384, 385
Nuclear Energy
126
Null vector
68
O
Odd harmonics
382
Orbital velocity/speed
194
Order of magnitude
28
Oscillations
342
Oscillatory motion
342
P
Parallax method
18
Parallelogram law of addition of vectors
66
Pascal's law
252
Path length
40
Path of projectile
78
Periodic force
358
Periodic motion
342
Periodic time
342
Permanent set
238
Phase angle
344
Phase constant
344
Pipe open at both ends
382
Pipe open at one end
381
Pitch
384
Plastic deformation
238
Plasticity
235
Polar satellite
196
Position vector and displacement
73
Potential energy of a spring
123
Potential energy
120
Power
128
Precession
143
Pressure gauge
253
Pressure of an ideal gas
328
Pressure
250
Principle of Conservation of Energy
128
Principle of moments
160
Progressive wave
373
Projectile motion
77
Projectile
77
Propagation constant
371
Pulse
369
Q
Quasi-static process
310, 311
R
Radiation
294
Radius of Gyration
164
Raman effect
11
Rarefactions
369
Ratio of specific heat capacities
334
Reaction time
51
Real gases
326
Rectilinear motion
39
Reductionism
2
Reflected wave
379
Reflection of waves
378
INDEX
311
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 13 :
 Refracted wave
379
Refrigerator
313
Regelation
287
Relative velocity in two dimensions
76
Relative velocity
51
Resolution of vectors
69
Resonance
358
Restoring force
236, 350, 369
Reversible engine
316, 317
Reversible processes
315
Reynolds number
264
Rigid body
141
Rolling motion
173
Root mean square speed
329
Rotation
142
S
S.H.M. (Simple Harmonic Motion)
343
Scalar-product
114
Scalars
65
Scientific Method
1
Second law of Thermodynamics
314
Shear modulus
242
Shearing strain
237
Shearing stress
237, 243
SI units
16
Significant figures
27
Simple pendulum
343, 353
Soap bubbles
268
Sonography
387
Sound
375
Specific heat capacity  of Solids
308, 335
Specific heat capacity of Gases
333, 334
Specific heat capacity of Water
335
Specific heat capacity
285, 308
Speed of efflux
259
Speed of Sound
375, 376
Speed of Transverse wave
375, 376
on a stretched string
Sphygmomanometer
277
Spring constant
352, 355
Standing waves
380
Stationary waves
382
Steady flow
257
Stethoscope
281
Stokes' law
263
Stopping distance
50
Strain
236
Streamline flow
257, 258
Streamline
257, 258
Stress
236
Stress-strain curve
238
Stretched string
374
Sublimation
294
Subtraction of vectors
67
Superposition principle
378
Surface energy
265
Surface tension
265
Symmetry
146
System of units
16
Systolic pressure
277
T
Temperature
279
Tensile strength
238
Tensile stress
236
Terminal velocity
264
Theorem of parallel axes
167
Theorem of perpendicular axes
165
Thermal conductivity
291
Thermal equilibrium
304
Thermal expansion
281
Thermal stress
284
Thermodynamic processes
310
Thermodynamic state variables
309
Thermodynamics
3, 303
Time of flight
78
Torque
154
Torricelli's Law
259, 260
Trade wind
294
Transmitted wave
379
Travelling wave
380
Triangle law of addition of vectors
66
Triple point
288
Trough
371
Tune
384
Turbulent flow
258, 259
U
Ultimate strength
238
Ultrasonic waves
387
Unification of Forces
10
Unified Atomic Mass Unit
21
Uniform circular motion
79
Uniform Motion
41
Uniformly accelerated motion
47
Unit vectors
70
V
Vane
356
Vaporisation
288
Vector-product
151
Vectors
66
Velocity amplitude
349
Venturi meter
260
Vibration
341
Viscosity
262
Volume expansion
281
Volume Strain
238
W
Wave equation
374
Wavelength
372
Wave speed
374
312
PHYSICS
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 14 :
 Waves
368
Waxing and waning of sound
385
Weak nuclear force
9
Weightlessness
197
Work done by variable force
118
Work
116
Work-Energy Theorem
116
Working substance
313
Y
Yield Point
238
Yield strength
238
Young's modulus
239
Z
Zeroth law of Thermodynamics
305
313
INDEX
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : answers - Page 15 :
 314
PHYSICS
NOTES
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 1 :
 Part II
Textbook for Class XI
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 2 :
 First Edition	
	
	
	
April 2006  Chaitra 1928
Reprinted	
	
	
	
October 2006, February 2008,
January 2009, January 2010,
January 2012, January 2013,
January 2014, January 2015,
May 2016, February 2017,
December 2017, January 2019,
October 2019, January 2021,
July 2021 and March 2022
Revised Edition
January 2023  Pausha 1944
Reprinted	
	
	
	
March 2024 Chaitra 1946
PD 350T SU
© National Council of Educational  
Research and Training, 2006, 2023
` 145.00
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
	 No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior 
permission of the publisher.
	 This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of 
trade,  be lent,  re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the 
publisher’s consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that 
in which it is published.
	 The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, 
Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by 
any other means is incorrect and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION  
Division, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New  Delhi 110 016	
Phone :  011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road 
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085	
Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan 
Ahmedabad 380 014	
Phone :  079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114	
Phone :  033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon  
Guwahati 781 021	
Phone :  0361-2674869	
Publication Team
Head, Publication	
:	 Anup Kumar Rajput
Division
Chief Editor	
:	 Shveta Uppal
Chief Production	
:	 Arun Chitkara
Officer
Chief Business	
:	 Amitabh Kumar
Manager (In charge)
Assistant Editor	
:	 R.N. Bhardwaj
Assistant Production	
:	 Om Prakash 
Officer
Cover and Illustrations
Shweta Rao
11087 – Physics (Part II)
Textbook for Class XI
ISBN  81-7450-508-3 (Part-I)
ISBN  81-7450-566-0 (Part-II)
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT  
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by the 
Secretary, National Council of Educational 
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo  
Marg, New Delhi 110016 and printed at Fauji 
Printing Press, Khasra. No. 24/20 Nangli 
Shakrawati Industrial Area, Najafgarh,  
New Delhi- 110 043
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 3 :
 Foreword
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005 recommends that children’s life 
at  school must be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a  
departure from the legacy of bookish learning which continues to shape our 
system and causes a gap between the school, home and community. The syllabi 
and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement this 
basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of 
sharp boundaries between different subject areas. We hope these measures will 
take us significantly further in the direction of a child-centred system of education 
outlined in the National Policy on Education (1986).
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and 
teachers will take to encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to 
pursue imaginative activities and questions. We must recognise that, given space, 
time and freedom, children generate new knowledge by engaging with the information 
passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis of 
examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning 
are ignored. Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat 
children as participants in learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change is school routines and mode of functioning. 
Flexibility in the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the 
annual calendar so that the required number of teaching days are actually devoted 
to teaching. The methods used for teaching and evaluation will also determine how 
effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at school a happy experience, 
rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried to address 
the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at 
different stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available 
for teaching. The textbook attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher 
priority and space to opportunities for contemplation and wondering, discussion in 
small groups, and activities requiring hands-on experience.
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) appreciates 
the hard work done by the textbook development committee responsible for 
this book. We wish to thank the Chairperson of the advisory group in science  
and mathematics, Professor J.V. Narlikar and the Chief Advisor for this book, 
Professor A.W. Joshi for guiding the work of this committee. Several teachers 
contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals 
for making this possible. We are indebted to the institutions and organisations 
which have generously permitted us to draw upon their resources, material and 
personnel. We are especially grateful to the members of the National Monitoring 
Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary and Higher Education, 
Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of Professor 
Mrinal Miri and Professor G.P. Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. 
As an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement 
in the quality of its products, NCERT welcomes comments and suggestions which 
will enable us to undertake further revision and refinement.
	
Director
New Delhi	
National Council of Educational 
20 December 2005	
Research and Training
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 4 :
 2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 5 :
 Rationalisation of Content in the Textbooks
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on 
students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the content 
load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative mindset. 
In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to rationalise the 
textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT 
across classes have been taken into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:
	
Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the same 
class
	
Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject
 
Difficulty level
	
Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions from 
teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or peer-learning
	
Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes 
given above.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 6 :
 2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 7 :
 Preface
More than a decade ago, based on National Policy of Education (NPE-1986),  
National Council of Educational Research and Training published physics  
textbooks for Classes XI and XII, prepared under the chairmanship of  
Professor T. V. Ramakrishnan, F.R.S., with the help of a team of learned co-authors. 
The books were well received by the teachers and students alike. The books, in 
fact, proved to be milestones and trend-setters. However, the development of 
textbooks, particularly science books, is a dynamic process in view of the changing 
perceptions, needs, feedback and the experiences of the students, educators and 
the society. Another version of the physics books, which was the result of the 
revised syllabus based on National Curriculum Framework for School Education-2000 
(NCFSE-2000), was brought out under the guidance of Professor Suresh Chandra, 
which continued up to now. Recently the NCERT brought out the National 
Curriculum Framework-2005 (NCF-2005), and the syllabus was accordingly revised 
during a curriculum renewal process at school level. The higher secondary stage 
syllabus (NCERT, 2005) has been developed accordingly. The Class XI textbook 
contains fifteen chapters in two parts. Part I contains first eight chapters while 
Part II contains next seven chapters. This book is the result of the renewed efforts 
of the present Textbook Development Team with the hope that the students will 
appreciate the beauty and logic of physics. The students may or may not continue 
to study physics beyond the higher secondary stage, but we feel that they will find 
the thought process of physics useful in any other branch they may like to pursue, 
be it finance, administration, social sciences, environment, engineering, technology, 
biology or medicine. For those who pursue physics beyond this stage, the matter 
developed in these books will certainly provide a sound base.
Physics is basic to the understanding of almost all the branches of science 
and technology. It is interesting to note that the ideas and concepts of physics are 
increasingly being used in other branches such as economics and commerce, and 
behavioural sciences too. We are conscious of the fact that some of the underlying 
simple basic physics principles are often conceptually quite intricate. In this book, 
we have tried to bring in a conceptual coherence. The pedagogy and the use of 
easily understandable language are at the core of our effort without sacrificing the 
rigour of the subject. The nature of the subject of physics is such that a certain 
minimum use of mathematics is a must. We have tried to develop the mathematical 
formulations in a logical fashion, as far as possible.
Students and teachers of physics must realise that physics is a branch which 
needs to be understood, not necessarily memorised. As one goes from secondary 
to higher secondary stage and beyond, physics involves mainly four components,  
(a) large amount of mathematical base, (b) technical words and terms, whose 
normal English meanings could be quite different, (c) new intricate concepts, 
and (d) experimental foundation. Physics needs mathematics because we wish to 
develop objective description of the world around us and express our observations 
in terms of measurable quantities. Physics discovers new properties of particles 
and wants to create a name for each one. The words are picked up normally from 
common English or Latin or Greek, but gives entirely different meanings to these 
words. It would be illuminating to look up words like energy, force, power, charge, 
spin, and several others, in any standard English dictionary, and compare their 
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 8 :
 meanings with their physics meanings. Physics develops intricate and often 
weird-looking concepts to explain the behaviour of particles. Finally, it must be 
remembered that entire physics is based on observations and experiments, without 
which a theory does not get acceptance into the domain of physics.
This book has some features which, we earnestly hope, will enhance its 
usefulness for the students. Each chapter is provided with a Summary at its end 
for a quick overview of the contents of the chapter. This is followed by Points to 
Ponder which points out the likely misconceptions arising in the minds of students, 
hidden implications of certain statements/principles given in the chapter and 
cautions needed in applying the knowledge gained from the chapter. They also 
raise some thought-provoking questions which would make a student think about 
life beyond physics. Students will find it interesting to think and apply their mind 
on these points. Further, a large number of solved examples are included in the 
text in order to clarify the concepts and/or to illustrate the application of these 
concepts in everyday real-life situations. Occasionally, historical perspective has 
been included to share the excitement of sequential development of the subject 
of physics. Some Boxed items are introduced in many chapters either for this 
purpose or to highlight some special features of the contents requiring additional 
attention of the learners. Finally, a Subject Index has been added at the end of 
the book for ease in locating keywords in the book.
The special nature of physics demands, apart from conceptual understanding, 
the knowledge of certain conventions, basic mathematical tools, numerical values 
of important physical constants, and systems of measurement units covering a 
vast range from microscopic to galactic levels. In order to equip the students, we 
have included the necessary tools and database in the form of Appendices A-1 
to A-9 at the end of the book. There are also some other appendices at the end of 
some chapters giving additional information or applications of matter discussed 
in that chapter.
Special attention has been paid for providing illustrative figures. To increase the 
clarity, the figures are drawn in two colours. A large number of Exercises are given 
at the end of each chapter. Some of these are from real-life situations. Students are 
urged to solve these and in doing so, they may find them very educative. Moreover, 
some Additional Exercises are given which are more challenging. Answers and 
hints to solve some of these are also included. In the entire book, SI units have 
been used. A comprehensive account of ‘units and measurement’ is given in Chapter 2 as 
a part of prescribed syllabus/curriculum as well as a help in their pursuit of physics. 
A box-item in this chapter brings out the difficulty in measuring as simple a thing as 
the length of a long curved line. Tables of SI base units and other related units are 
given here merely to indicate the presently accepted definitions and to indicate the 
high degree of accuracy with which measurements are possible today. The numbers 
given here are not to be memorised or asked in examinations.
There is a perception among students, teachers, as well as the general public 
that there is a steep gradient between secondary and higher secondary stages. 
But a little thought shows that it is bound to be there in the present scenario of 
education. Education up to secondary stage is general education where a student 
has to learn several subjects – sciences, social sciences, mathematics, languages, at 
an elementary level. Education at the higher secondary stage and beyond, borders 
on acquiring professional competence, in some chosen fields of endeavour. You  
may like to compare this with the following situation. Children play cricket or 
badminton in lanes and small spaces outside (or inside) their homes. But then  
viii
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 9 :
 some of them want to make it to the school team, then district team, then State 
team and then the National team. At every stage, there is bound to be a steep 
gradient. Hard work would have to be put in whether students want to pursue 
their education in the area of sciences, humanities, languages, music, fine arts, 
commerce, finance, architecture, or if they want to become sportspersons or 
fashion designers.
Completing this book has only been possible because of the spontaneous 
and continuous support of many people. The Textbook Development Team is 
thankful to Dr. V. H. Raybagkar for allowing us to use his box item in Chapter 
4 and to Dr. F. I. Surve for allowing us to use two of his box items in Chapter 
15. We express also our gratitude to the Director, NCERT, for entrusting 
us with the task of preparing this textbook as a part of national effort for 
improving science education. The Head, Department of Education in Science 
and Mathematics, NCERT, was always willing to help us in our endeavour in 
every possible way. 
The previous text got excellent academic inputs from teachers, students and 
experts who sincerely suggested improvement during the past few years. We are 
thankful to all those who conveyed these inputs to NCERT. We are also thankful to 
the members of the Review Workshop and Editing Workshop organised to discuss 
and refine the first draft. We thank the Chairmen and their teams of authors for the 
text written by them in 1988, which provided the base and reference for developing 
the 2002 version as well as the present version of the textbook. Occasionally, 
substantial portions from the earlier versions, particularly those appreciated by 
students/teachers, have been adopted/adapted and retained in the present book 
for the benefit of coming generation of learners. 
We welcome suggestions and comments from our valued users, especially 
students and teachers. We wish our young readers a happy journey to the exciting 
realm of physics. 
A. W. Joshi
Chief Advisor
Textbook Development Committee
ix
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 10 :
 Acknowledgements
The National Council of Educational Research and Training acknowledges 
the valuable contribution of the individuals and organisations involved in the 
development of Physics textbook for Class XI. The Council also acknowledges 
the valuable contribution of the following academics for reviewing and refining 
the manuscripts of this book: Deepak Kumar, Professor, School of Physical 
Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi; Pankaj Sharan, Professor, 
Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi; Ajoy Ghatak, Emeritus Professor, Indian 
Institute of Technology, New Delhi; V. Sundara Raja, Professor, Sri Venkateswara 
University, Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh; C.S. Adgaonkar, Reader (Retd), Institute 
of Science, Nagpur, Maharashtra; D.A. Desai, Lecturer (Retd), Ruparel College, 
Mumbai, Maharashtra; F.I. Surve, Lecturer, Nowrosjee Wadia College, Pune, 
Maharashtra; Atul Mody, Lecturer (SG), VES College of Arts, Science and 
Commerce, Chembur, Mumbai, Maharashtra; A.K. Das, PGT, St. Xavier’s Senior 
Secondary School, Delhi; Suresh Kumar, PGT, Delhi Public School, Dwarka,  
New Delhi; Yashu Kumar, PGT, Kulachi Hansraj Model School, Ashok Vihar, 
Delhi; K.S. Upadhyay, PGT, Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya, Muzaffar Nagar (U.P.);  
I.K. Gogia, PGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Gole Market, New Delhi; Vijay Sharma, 
PGT, Vasant Valley School, Vasant Kunj, New Delhi; R.S. Dass, Vice Principal 
(Retd), Balwant Ray Mehta Vidya Bhawan, Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi and 
Parthasarthi Panigrahi, PGT, D.V. CLW Girls School, Chittranjan, West Bengal.
	
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the valuable contribution of  
the following academics for the editing and finalisation of this book:  A.S. Mahajan,  
Professor (Retd), Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai, Maharashtra;  
D.A. Desai, Lecturer (Retd), Ruparel College, Mumbai, Maharashtra;  
V.H. Raybagkar, Reader, Nowrosjee Wadia College, Pune, Maharashtra and  
Atul Mody, Lecturer (SG), VES College of Arts, Science and Commerce, Chembur, 
Mumbai, Maharashtra.
	
The Council also acknowledges the valuable contributions of the following 
academics for reviewing and refining the text in 2017: A.K. Srivastava, DESM, 
NCERT, New Delhi; Arnab Sen, NERIE, Shillong; L.S. Chauhan, RIE, Bhopal; 
O.N. Awasthi (Retd.), RIE, Bhopal; Rachna Garg, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi; 
Raman Namboodiri, RIE, Mysuru; R.R. Koireng, DCS, NCERT, New Delhi; 
Shashi Prabha, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi; and S.V. Sharma, RIE, Ajmer.
	
Special thanks are due to M. Chandra, Professor and  Head, DESM, NCERT 
for her support.
	
The Council also acknowledges the efforts of Deepak Kapoor, Incharge, 
Computer Station, Inder Kumar, DTP Operator; Saswati Banerjee,  
Copy Editor; Abhimanu Mohanty and Anuradha, Proof Readers in shaping  
this book.
	
The contributions of the Publication Department in bringing out this book 
are also duly acknowledged.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 11 :
 Textbook Development Committee
Chairperson, Advisory Group for Textbooks in Science and Mathematics
J.V. Narlikar, Emeritus Professor, Chairman,  Advisory Committee, Inter University 
Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCCA), Ganeshbhind, Pune University, Pune
Chief Advisor
A.W. Joshi, Professor, Honorary Visiting Scientist, NCRA, Pune (Formerly at 
Department of Physics, University of Pune)
Members
Anuradha Mathur, PGT , Modern School, Vasant Vihar, New Delhi
Chitra Goel, PGT, Rajkiya Pratibha Vikas Vidyalaya, Tyagraj Nagar, Lodhi Road,  
New Delhi
Gagan Gupta, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
H.C. Pradhan, Professor, Homi Bhabha Centre of Science Education, Tata Institute  
of Fundamental Research, V.N. Purav Marg, Mankhurd, Mumbai
N. Panchapakesan, Professor (Retd.), Department of Physics and Astrophysics, 
University of  Delhi, Delhi
P.K. Srivastava, Professor (Retd.), Director, CSEC,  University of Delhi, Delhi
P.K. Mohanty, PGT, Sainik School, Bhubaneswar
P.C. Agarwal, Reader, Regional Institute of Education, NCERT, Sachivalaya Marg, 
Bhubaneswar
R. Joshi, Lecturer (S.G.), DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
S. Rai Choudhary, Professor, Department of Physics and Astrophysics, University of 
Delhi,  Delhi
S.K. Dash, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Sher Singh, PGT, Lodhi Road, New Delhi
S.N. Prabhakara, PGT, DM School,  Regional Institute of Education, NCERT, Mysore
Thiyam Jekendra Singh, Professor, Department of Physics, University of Manipur, 
Imphal 
V.P. Srivastava, Reader, DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
Member-Coordinator
B.K. Sharma, Professor,  DESM, NCERT, New Delhi
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 12 :
 Cover design 
(Adapted from the website of the Nobel Foundation  
http://www.nobelprize.org)
The strong nuclear force binds protons and 
neutrons in a nucleus and is the strongest of 
nature’s four fundamental forces. A mystery 
surrounding the strong nuclear force has been 
solved. The three quarks within the proton can 
sometimes appear to be free, although no free 
quarks have ever been observed. The quarks 
have a quantum mechanical property called 
‘colour’ and interact with each other through  
the exchange of particles called ‘gluons’  
— nature glue.
Back Cover
(Adapted from the website of the ISRO 
http://www.isro.gov.in)
CARTOSAT-1 is a state-of-the-art Remote 
Sensing Satellite, being eleventh one in the 
Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) Satellite Series, 
built by ISRO. CARTOSAT-1, having mass of  
156 kg at lift off, has been launched into a  
618 km high polar Sun Synchronous Orbit 
(SSO) by ISRO’s Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle,  
PSLV-C6. It is mainly intended for cartographic 
applications.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 13 :
 A Note for the Teachers
To make the curriculum learner-centred, students should be made to participate and interact 
in the learning process directly. Once a week or one out of every six classes would be a good 
periodicity for such seminars and mutual interaction. Some suggestions for making the discussion 
participatory are given below, with reference to some specific topics in this book.
Students may be divided into groups of five to six. The membership of these groups may be 
rotated during the year, if felt necessary.
The topic for discussion can be presented on the board or on slips of paper. Students should 
be asked to write their reactions or answers to questions, whichever is asked, on the given sheets. 
They should then discuss in their groups and add modifications or comments in those sheets. These 
should be discussed either in the same or in a different class. The sheets may also be evaluated.
We suggest here three possible topics from the book. The first two topics suggested are, in 
fact, very general and refer to the development of science over the past four centuries or more. 
Students and teachers may think of more such topics for each seminar.
1.	 Ideas that changed civilisation
Suppose human beings are becoming extinct. A message has to be left for future generations 
or alien visitors. Eminent physicist R P Feynmann wanted the following message left for future 
beings, if any.
“Matter is made up of atoms”
A lady student and teacher of literature, wanted the following message left:
“Water existed, so human beings could happen”.
Another person thought it should be: “Idea of wheel for motion”
Write down what message each one of you would like to leave for future generations. Then 
discuss it in your group and add or modify, if you want to change your mind. Give it to your 
teacher and join in any discussion that follows.
2.	 Reductionism
Kinetic Theory of Gases relates the Big to the Small, the Macro to the Micro. A gas as a system 
is related to its components, the molecules. This way of describing a system as a result of the 
properties of its components is usually called Reductionism. It explains the behaviour of the 
group by the simpler and predictable behaviour of individuals. Macroscopic observations and 
microscopic properties have a mutual interdependence in this approach. Is this method useful?
This way of understanding has its limitations outside physics and chemistry, may be even in 
these subjects. A painting cannot be discussed as a collection of the properties of chemicals used 
in making the canvas and the painting. What emerges is more than the sum of its components.
Question: Can you think of other areas where such an approach is used?
          Describe briefly a system which is fully describable in terms of its components.  Describe 
one which is not. Discuss with other members of the group and write your views. Give it to your 
teacher and join in any discussion that may follow.
3.	 Molecular approach to heat
Describe what you think will happen in the following case. An enclosure is separated by a porous 
wall into two parts. One is filled with nitrogen gas (N2) and the other with CO2. Gases will diffuse 
from one side to the other.
Question 1: Will both gases diffuse to the same extent? If not, which will diffuse more. Give reasons.
Question 2: Will the pressure and temperature be unchanged? If not, what will be the changes 
in both. Give reasons.
	
Write down your answers. Discuss with the group and modify them or add comments. 
Give to the teacher and join in the discussion.
	
Students and teachers will find that such seminars and discussions lead to tremendous 
understanding, not only of physics, but also of science and social sciences. They also bring in 
some maturity among students.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 14 :
 Contents of Physics Part I
C h a p t e r  1
Units and Measurements	
1
C h a p t e r  2
Motion in a Straight Line	
13
C h a p t e r  3
Motion in a Plane	
37
C h a p t e r  4
Laws of Motion	
49
C h a p t e r  5
Work, Energy and Power	
71
C h a p t e r  6
System of Particles and Rotational Motion	
92
C h a p t e r  7
Gravitation	
127
Appendices	
144
answers	
160
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 15 :
 CONTENTS
Foreword	
iii
Rationalisation of Contens in the Textbooks	
v
Preface	
vii	
A Note for the Teachers	
xiii
C  h a p t e r    8
Mechanical Properties of Solids
8.1	
Introduction	
167
8.2	
Stress and strain	
168
8.3	
Hooke’s law	
169
8.4	
Stress-strain curve	
169
8.5	
Elastic moduli	
170
8.6	
Applications of elastic behaviour of materials	
174
C  h a p t e r    9
Mechanical Properties of Fluids
9.1	
Introduction	
180
9.2	
Pressure	
180
9.3	
Streamline flow	
186
9.4	
Bernoulli’s principle	
187
9.5	
Viscosity	
190
9.6	
Surface tension	
192
C  h a p t e r    10
Thermal Properties of Matter
10.1	
Introduction	
202
10.2	
Temperature and heat	
202
10.3	
Measurement of temperature	
203
10.4	
Ideal-gas equation and absolute temperature	
203
10.5	
Thermal expansion	
204
10.6	
Specific heat capacity	
208
10.7	
Calorimetry	
209
10.8	
Change of state	
210
10.9	
Heat transfer	
214
10.10	Newton’s law of cooling	
219
C  h a p t e r    11
Thermodynamics
11.1	
Introduction	
226
11.2	
Thermal equilibrium	
227
11.3	
Zeroth law of thermodynamics	
228
11.4	
Heat, internal energy and work	
229
11.5	
First law of thermodynamics	
230
11.6	
Specific heat capacity	
231
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : about and contents - Page 16 :
 11.7	
Thermodynamic state variables and equation of state	
232
11.8	
Thermodynamic processes	
233
11.9	
Second law of thermodynamics	
236
11.10	Reversible and irreversible processes	
236
11.11	Carnot engine	
237
C  h a p t e r    12
Kinetic Theory
12.1	
Introduction	
244
12.2	
Molecular nature of matter	
244
12.3	
Behaviour of gases 	
246
12.4	
Kinetic theory of an ideal gas	
248
12.5	
Law of equipartition of energy 	
252
12.6	
Specific heat capacity	
253
12.7	
Mean free path	
254
C  h a p t e r    13
Oscillations
13.1	
Introduction	
259
13.2	
Periodic and oscilatory motions	
260
13.3	
Simple harmonic motion	
262
13.4	
Simple harmonic motion and uniform circular motion	
264
13.5	
Velocity and acceleration in simple harmonic motion	
266
13.6	
Force law for simple harmonic motion	
267
13.7	
Energy in simple harmonic motion	
268
13.8	
The Simple Pendulum	
270
C  h a p t e r    14
Waves
14.1	
Introduction	
278
14.2	
Transverse and longitudinal waves	
280
14.3	
Displacement relation in a progressive wave	
281
14.4	
The speed of a travelling wave	
284
14.5	
The principle of superposition of waves	
287
14.6	
Reflection of waves 	
288
14.7	
Beats	
293
answers	
300
	
Bibliography	
307
index		
309
xvi
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 1 :
 CHAPTER EIGHT
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS
8.1
INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 6, we studied the rotation of the bodies and then
realised that the motion of a body depends on how mass is
distributed within the body.  We restricted ourselves to simpler
situations of rigid bodies.  A rigid body generally means a
hard solid object having a definite shape and size.  But in
reality,  bodies can be stretched, compressed and bent. Even
the  appreciably  rigid  steel bar can be deformed when a
sufficiently large external force is applied on it.  This means
that solid bodies are not perfectly rigid.
A solid has  definite shape and size. In order to change (or
deform) the shape or size of a body, a force  is required. If
you stretch a helical spring by gently pulling its ends, the
length of the spring increases slightly. When you leave the
ends of the spring, it regains its original size and shape.  The
property of a body, by virtue of  which  it tends to regain its
original size and shape when the applied force is removed, is
known as elasticity and the deformation caused is known
as elastic deformation. However, if you apply force to a lump
of putty or mud, they have no gross tendency to regain their
previous shape, and they get permanently deformed. Such
substances are called plastic and this property is called
plasticity. Putty and mud are close to ideal plastics.
 The elastic behaviour of materials plays an important role
in engineering design.  For example, while designing a
building, knowledge of elastic properties of materials like steel,
concrete etc. is essential.  The same is true in the design of
bridges, automobiles, ropeways etc.  One could also ask  —
Can we design an aeroplane which is very  light  but
sufficiently  strong?  Can we design an artificial limb which
is lighter but stronger?  Why does a railway track have a
particular shape  like I?  Why  is glass brittle while brass is
not?  Answers to such questions begin with the study of how
relatively  simple kinds of loads or forces act to deform
different solids bodies.  In this chapter, we  shall study the
8.1 Introduction
8.2 Stress and strain
8.3 Hooke’s law
8.4 Stress-strain curve
8.5 Elastic moduli
8.6 Applications 
of 
elastic
behaviour of materials
Summary
Points to ponder
Exercises
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 2 :
 168
PHYSICS
8.2  STRESS AND STRAIN
When  forces are applied on a body in such a
manner that the body is still in static equilibrium,
it is deformed to a small or large extent depending
upon the nature of the material of the body and
the magnitude of the deforming force. The
deformation may not be noticeable visually in
many materials but it is there. When a body is
subjected to a deforming force, a restoring force
is developed in the body. This restoring force is
equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to
the applied force. The restoring force per unit area
is known as stress.  If F is the force applied normal
to the cross–section and A  is the  area of cross
section of  the body,
Magnitude of the stress = F/A
(8.1)
The SI unit of stress is  N m–2 or pascal (Pa)
and its dimensional formula is [ ML–1T–2 ].
There are three ways in which a solid may
change its dimensions when an external force
acts on it. These are shown in Fig. 8.1. In
Fig.8.1(a), a cylinder is stretched by two equal
forces applied normal to its cross-sectional area.
The restoring force per unit area  in this case is
called tensile stress. If the cylinder is
compressed under the action of applied forces,
the restoring force per unit area is known as
compressive stress. Tensile or compressive
stress can also be termed as longitudinal stress.
In both the cases, there is a change in the
length of the cylinder. The change in the length
∆L to the original length L of the body (cylinder
in this case) is known as longitudinal strain.
Longitudinal strain  
∆
=
L
L
(8.2)
However, if two equal and opposite  deforming
forces are applied parallel to the cross-sectional
area of the cylinder, as shown in Fig. 8.1(b),
there is relative displacement between the
opposite faces of the cylinder.  The restoring force
per unit area developed due to the applied
tangential force is known as tangential or
shearing stress.
As a result of applied tangential force, there
is a relative displacement ∆x between opposite
faces of the cylinder as shown in the Fig. 8.1(b).
The strain so produced is known as shearing
strain and it is defined as the ratio of relative
displacement of the faces ∆x  to the length of the
cylinder L.
Shearing strain 
∆
=
x
L  = tan θ
(8.3)
where θ is the angular displacement of the
cylinder from the vertical (original position of the
cylinder). Usually  θ is very small, tan θ
is nearly equal to angle θ, (if θ = 10°, for
example, there is only 1% difference between θ
and tan θ).
It can also be visualised, when a book is
pressed with the hand and pushed horizontally,
as shown in Fig. 8.2 (c).
Thus, shearing strain  = tan θ ≈ θ
(8.4)
In Fig. 8.1 (d), a solid sphere placed in the fluid
under high pressure is compressed uniformly on
all sides. The force applied by the fluid acts in
perpendicular direction at each point of the
surface and the body is said to be under
hydraulic compression. This leads to decrease
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 8.1
(a) A cylindrical body under tensile stress elongates by ∆L (b) Shearing stress on a cylinder deforming it by
an angle θ (c) A body subjected to shearing stress (d) A solid body under a stress normal to the surface at
every point (hydraulic stress). The volumetric strain is ∆V/V, but there is no change in shape.
elastic behaviour and mechanical properties of
solids which would answer many such
questions.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 3 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS
169
in its volume without any change of its
geometrical shape.
The body develops internal restoring forces
that are equal and opposite to the forces applied
by the fluid (the body restores its original shape
and size when taken out from the fluid). The
internal restoring force per unit area in this case
is known as hydraulic stress and in magnitude
is equal to the hydraulic pressure (applied force
per unit area).
The strain produced by a hydraulic pressure
is called volume strain and is defined as the
ratio of change in volume (∆V) to the original
volume (V).
Volume strain 
∆
=
V
V
(8.5)
Since the strain is a ratio of change in
dimension to the original dimension, it has no
units or dimensional formula.
8.3  HOOKE’S LAW
Stress and strain take different forms in the
situations depicted in the Fig. (8.1). For small
deformations the stress and strain are
proportional to each other. This is known as
Hooke’s law.
Thus,
stress ∝ strain
stress = k × strain
(8.6)
where k is the proportionality constant and is
known as modulus of elasticity.
Hooke’s law is an empirical law and is found
to be valid for most materials. However, there
are some materials which do not exhibit this
linear relationship.
8.4  STRESS-STRAIN CURVE
The relation between the stress and the strain
for a given material under tensile stress can be
found experimentally. In a standard test of
tensile properties, a test cylinder or a wire is
stretched by an applied force. The fractional
change in length (the strain) and the applied
force needed to cause the strain are recorded.
The applied force is gradually increased in steps
and the change in length is noted. A graph is
plotted between the stress (which is equal in
magnitude to the applied force per unit area) and
the strain produced. A typical graph for a metal
is shown in Fig. 8.2. Analogous graphs for
compression and shear stress may also be
obtained. The stress-strain curves vary from
material to material. These curves help us to
understand how a given material deforms with
increasing loads. From the graph, we can see
that in the region between O to A, the curve is
linear.  In this region, Hooke’s law is obeyed.
The body regains its original dimensions when
the applied force is removed. In this region, the
solid behaves as an elastic body.
In the region from A to B, stress and strain
are not proportional. Nevertheless, the body still
returns to its original dimension when the load
is removed. The point B in the curve is known
as yield point (also known as elastic limit) and
the corresponding stress is known as yield
strength (σy) of the material.
If the load is increased further, the stress
developed exceeds the yield strength and strain
increases rapidly even for a small change in the
stress. The portion of the curve between B and
D shows this. When the load is removed, say at
some point C between B and D, the body does
not regain its original dimension. In this case,
even when the stress is zero, the strain is not
zero. The material is said to have a permanent
set. The deformation is said to be plastic
deformation. The point D on the graph is the
ultimate tensile strength (σu) of the material.
Beyond this point, additional strain is produced
even by a reduced applied force and fracture
occurs at point E. If the ultimate strength and
fracture points D and E are close, the material
is said to be brittle. If they are far apart, the
material is said to be ductile.
Fig. 8.2 A typical stress-strain curve for a metal.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 4 :
 170
PHYSICS
As stated earlier, the stress-strain behaviour
varies from material to material. For example,
rubber can be pulled to several times its original
length and still returns to its original shape. Fig.
8.3 shows stress-strain curve for the elastic
tissue of aorta, present in the heart. Note that
although elastic region is very large, the material
does not obey Hooke’s law over most of the region.
Secondly, there is no well defined plastic region.
Substances like tissue of aorta, rubber etc.
which can be stretched to cause large strains
are called elastomers.
8.5  ELASTIC MODULI
The proportional region within the elastic limit
of the stress-strain curve (region OA in Fig. 8.2)
is of great importance for structural and
manufacturing engineering designs. The ratio
of stress and strain, called modulus of elasticity,
is found to be a characteristic of the material.
8.5.1  Young’s Modulus
Experimental observation show that for a given
material, the magnitude of the strain produced
is same whether the stress is tensile or
compressive. The ratio of tensile (or compressive)
stress (σ) to the longitudinal strain (ε) is defined as
Young’s modulus and is denoted by the symbol Y.
Y = σ
ε
(8.7)
From Eqs. (8.1) and (8.2), we have
Y = (F/A)/(∆L/L)
   = (F × L) /(A × ∆L)
(8.8)
Since strain is a dimensionless quantity, the
unit of Young’s modulus is the same as that of
stress i.e., N m–2 or Pascal (Pa). Table 8.1 gives
the values of Young’s moduli and yield strengths
of some material.
From the data given in Table 8.1, it is noticed
that for metals Young’s moduli are large.
Fig. 8.3
Stress-strain curve for the elastic tissue of
Aorta, the large tube (vessel) carrying blood
from the heart.
Table 8.1 Young’s moduli and yield strenghs of some material
# Substance tested under compression
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 5 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS
171
u
u
Therefore, these materials require a large force
to produce small change in length. To increase
the length of a thin steel wire of 0.1 cm2 cross-
sectional area by 0.1%, a force of 2000 N is
required. The force required to produce the same
strain in aluminium, brass and copper wires
having the same cross-sectional area are 690 N,
900 N and 1100 N respectively. It means that
steel is more elastic than copper, brass and
aluminium. It is for this reason that steel is
preferred in heavy-duty machines and in
structural designs. Wood, bone, concrete and
glass have rather small Young’s moduli.
Example 8.1  A structural steel rod  has a
radius of 10 mm and a length of 1.0 m. A
100 kN force stretches it along its length.
Calculate (a) stress, (b) elongation, and (c)
strain on the rod. Young’s modulus, of
structural steel is 2.0 × 1011 N m-2.
Answer We assume that the rod is held by a
clamp at one end, and the force F is applied at
the other end, parallel to the length of the rod.
Then the stress on the rod is given by
Stress
F
A
=
 =
F
r
π 2
        =
× (
)
×
−
100
10 N
3.14
10
m
3
2
2
         = 3.18 × 108 N m–2
The elongation,
(
)
F/A L
L
Y
∆
=
    = (
)(
)
×
×
8
–2
11
–2
1m
3.18
10 N m
2
10
N m
    = 1.59 × 10–3 m
    = 1.59 mm
The strain is given by
Strain   = ∆L/L
            = (1.59 × 10–3 m)/(1m)
             = 1.59 × 10–3
             = 0.16 %
⊳
Example 8.2 A copper wire of length 2.2 m
and a steel wire of length 1.6 m, both of
diameter 3.0 mm, are connected end to end.
When stretched by a load, the net
elongation is found to be 0.70 mm. Obtain
the load applied.
Answer
The copper and steel wires are under
a tensile stress because they have the same
tension (equal to the load W) and the same area
of cross-section A. From Eq. (8.7) we have stress
= strain × Young’s modulus. Therefore
W/A = Yc × (∆Lc/Lc) = Ys × (∆Ls/Ls)
where the subscripts c  and s refer to copper
and stainless steel respectively. Or,
∆Lc/∆Ls = (Ys/Yc) × (Lc/Ls)
Given Lc = 2.2 m, Ls = 1.6 m,
From Table 9.1 Yc = 1.1 × 1011 N.m–2, and
   Ys = 2.0 × 1011 N.m–2.
∆Lc/∆Ls = (2.0 × 1011/1.1 × 1011) × (2.2/1.6) = 2.5.
The total elongation is given to be
∆Lc + ∆Ls =  7.0  × 10-4 m
Solving the above equations,
∆Lc = 5.0  × 10-4 m,   and   ∆Ls = 2.0  × 10-4 m.
Therefore
W   = (A × Yc × ∆Lc)/Lc
= π (1.5 × 10-3)2 × [(5.0 × 10-4 × 1.1 × 1011)/2.2]
= 1.8 × 102 N
⊳
uExample 8.3 In a human pyramid in a
circus, the entire weight of the balanced
group is supported by the legs of a performer
who is lying on his back (as shown in Fig.
8.4). The combined mass of all the persons
performing the act, and the tables, plaques
etc. involved is 280 kg. The mass of the
performer lying on his back at the bottom of
the pyramid is 60 kg. Each thighbone (femur)
of this performer has a length of 50 cm and
an effective radius of 2.0 cm. Determine the
amount by which each thighbone gets
compressed under the extra load.
Fig. 8.4 Human pyramid in a circus.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 6 :
 172
PHYSICS
Answer
Total mass of all the performers, tables,
plaques etc.
    = 280 kg
Mass of the performer  = 60 kg
Mass supported by the legs of the performer
at the bottom of the pyramid
= 280 – 60 = 220 kg
Weight of this supported mass
 = 220 kg wt. = 220 × 9.8 N = 2156 N.
Weight supported by each thighbone of the
performer = ½ (2156) N = 1078 N.
From Table 9.1, the Young’s modulus for bone
is given by
Y
=
9.4 × 109 N m–2.
Length of each thighbone L = 0.5 m
the radius of thighbone = 2.0 cm
Thus the cross-sectional area of the thighbone
A  = π × (2 × 10-2)2 m2 = 1.26 × 10-3 m2.
Using Eq. (9.8), the compression in each
thighbone (∆L) can be computed as
∆L = [(F × L)/(Y × A)]
= [(1078 × 0.5)/(9.4 × 109 × 1.26 × 10-3)]
= 4.55 × 10-5 m or 4.55 × 10-3 cm.
This is a very small change! The fractional
decrease in the thighbone is ∆L/L = 0.000091 or
0.0091%.
⊳
8.5.2  Shear Modulus
The ratio of shearing stress to the corresponding
shearing strain is called the shear modulus of
the material and is represented by G. It is also
called the modulus of rigidity.
G  = shearing stress (σs)/shearing strain
G  = (F/A)/(∆x/L)
    = (F × L)/(A × ∆x)
(8.10)
Similarly, from Eq. (9.4)
G  = (F/A)/θ
     = F/(A × θ)
(8.11)
The shearing stress σs can also be expressed as
σs  =  G  × θ
(8.12)
SI unit of shear modulus is N m–2 or Pa. The
shear moduli of a few common materials are
given in Table 9.2. It can be seen that shear
modulus (or modulus of rigidity) is generally less
than Young’s modulus (from Table 9.1). For most
materials G ≈ Y/3.
u
Table 8.2
Shear moduli (G) of some common
materials
Material
G (109 Nm–2
or GPa)
Aluminium
25
Brass
36
Copper
42
Glass
23
Iron
70
Lead
5.6
Nickel
77
Steel
84
Tungsten
150
Wood
10
 Example 8.4 A square lead slab of side 50
cm and thickness 10 cm is subject to a
shearing force (on its narrow face) of 9.0 ×
104 N. The lower edge is riveted to the floor.
How much will the upper edge be displaced?
Answer  The lead slab is fixed and the force is
applied parallel to the narrow face as shown in
Fig. 8.6. The area of the face parallel to which
this force is applied is
 A  = 50 cm × 10 cm
                = 0.5 m × 0.1 m
= 0.05 m2
Therefore, the stress applied is
= (9.4  × 104 N/0.05 m2)
                  = 1.80 × 106 N.m–2
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa
Fig. 8.5
We know that shearing strain = (∆x/L)= Stress /G.
Therefore the displacement ∆x = (Stress × L)/G
 = (1.8 × 106 N m–2 × 0.5m)/(5.6 × 109 N m–2)
 = 1.6 × 10–4 m = 0.16 mm
⊳
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 7 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS
173
8.5.3  Bulk Modulus
In Section (8.3), we have seen that when a body
is submerged in a fluid, it undergoes a hydraulic
stress (equal in magnitude to the hydraulic
pressure). This leads to the decrease in the
volume of the body thus producing a strain called
volume strain [Eq. (8.5)]. The ratio of hydraulic
stress to the corresponding hydraulic strain is
called bulk modulus. It is denoted by symbol B.
B = – p/(∆V/V)
(8.12)
The negative sign indicates the fact that with
an increase in pressure, a decrease in volume
occurs. That is, if p is positive, ∆V is negative.
Thus for a system in equilibrium, the value of
bulk modulus B is always positive. SI unit of
bulk modulus is the same as that of pressure
i.e., N m–2 or Pa. The bulk moduli of a few common
materials are given in Table 8.3.
The reciprocal of the bulk modulus is called
compressibility and is denoted by k. It is defined
as the fractional change in volume per unit
increase in pressure.
k = (1/B) = – (1/∆p) × (∆V/V)
(8.13)
It can be seen from the data given in Table
8.3 that the bulk moduli for solids are much
larger than for liquids, which are again much
larger than the bulk modulus for gases (air).
Table 8.4 Stress, strain and various elastic moduli
Type of
Stress
Strain
    Change in
Elastic
 Name of
State of
stress
 shape  volume
Modulus
 Modulus
Matter
 Tensile
Two equal and
Elongation or
 Yes
No           Y = (F×L)/  Young’s
Solid
  or
opposite forces
compression
   (A×∆L)
 modulus
 compressive
perpendicular to
parallel to force
 (σ = F/A)
opposite faces
direction (∆L/L)
(longitudinal strain)
 Shearing
Two equal and
Pure shear, θ
 Yes
No        G = F/(A×θ)
 Shear
Solid
 (σs = F/A)
opposite forces
 modulus
parallel to oppoiste
 or modulus
surfaces forces
 of rigidity
in each case such
that total force and
total torque on the
body vanishes
 Hydraulic
Forces perpendicular
Volume change
  No
Yes      B = –p/(∆V/V)  Bulk
Solid, liquid
everywhere to the
(compression or
 modulus
and gas
surface, force per
elongation)
unit area (pressure)
(∆V/V)
same everywhere.
Table 8.3
Bulk moduli (B) of some common
Materials
Material
B (109 N m–2 or GPa)
Solids
Aluminium
72
Brass
61
Copper
140
Glass
37
Iron
100
Nickel
260
Steel
160
Liquids
Water
2.2
Ethanol
0.9
Carbon disulphide
1.56
Glycerine
4.76
Mercury
25
Gases
Air (at STP)
1.0 × 10–4
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 8 :
 174
PHYSICS
u
Thus, solids are the least compressible, whereas,
gases are the most compressible. Gases are about
a million times more compressible than solids!
Gases have large compressibilities, which vary
with pressure and temperature. The
incompressibility of the solids is primarily due
to the tight coupling between the neighbouring
atoms. The molecules in liquids are also bound
with their neighbours but not as strong as in
solids. Molecules in gases are very poorly
coupled to their neighbours.
Table 8.4 shows the various types of stress,
strain, elastic moduli, and the applicable state
of matter at a glance.
Example 8.5 The average depth of Indian
Ocean is about 3000 m. Calculate the
fractional compression, ∆V/V, of water at
the bottom of the ocean, given that the bulk
modulus of water is 2.2 ××××× 109 N m–2. (Take
g  = 10 m s–2)
Answer   The pressure exerted by a  3000 m
column of water on the bottom layer
p = hρ g  = 3000 m  × 1000 kg m–3 × 10 m s–2
= 3  × 107 kg m–1 s-2
= 3  × 107 N m–2
Fractional compression ∆V/V, is
∆V/V  =  stress/B  = (3 × 107 N m-2)/(2.2 × 109 N m–2)
= 1.36 × 10-2 or  1.36 %    ⊳
8.5.4 POISSON’S RATIO
The strain perpendicular to the applied force is
called lateral strain. Simon Poisson pointed out
that within the elastic limit, lateral strain is
directly proportional to the longitudinal strain.
The ratio of the lateral strain to the longitudinal
strain in a stretched wire is called Poisson’s
ratio. If the original diameter of the wire is d
and the contraction of the diameter under stress
is ∆d, the lateral strain is ∆d/d. If the original
length of the wire is L and the elongation under
stress is ∆L, the longitudinal strain is ∆L/L.
Poisson’s ratio is then (∆d/d)/(∆L/L) or (∆d/∆L)
× (L/d). Poisson’s ratio is a ratio of two strains;
it is a pure number and has no dimensions or
units. Its value depends only on the nature of
material. For steels the value is between 0.28 and
0.30, and for aluminium alloys it is about 0.33.
8.5.5 Elastic Potential Energy
in a Stretched Wire
When a wire is put under a tensile stress, work
is done against the inter-atomic forces. This
work is stored in the wire in the form of elastic
potential energy. When a wire of original length
L and area of cross-section A is subjected to a
deforming force F along the length of the wire,
let the length of the wire be elongated by l. Then
from Eq. (8.8), we have F = YA × (l/L). Here Y is
the Young’s modulus of the material of the wire.
Now for a further elongation of infinitesimal
small length dl, work done dW is F × dl or YAldl/
L. Therefore, the amount of work done (W) in
increasing the length of the wire from L to L + l,
that is from l = 0 to l = l is
      W = 
=
×
∫0
2
2
l
YAl
YA
l
dl
L
L
      W = 


×
×
×




2
1
2
l
Y
AL
L
= 1
2 ×  Young’s modulus × strain2 ×
         volume of the wire
= 1
2 ×  stress × strain × volume of the
          wire
This work is stored in the wire in the form of
elastic potential energy (U). Therefore the elastic
potential energy per unit volume of the wire (u) is
       u = 1
2 ×σ ε
(8.14)
8.6
APPLICATIONS OF ELASTIC
BEHAVIOUR OF MATERIALS
The elastic behaviour of materials plays an
important role in everyday life. All engineering
designs require precise knowledge of the elastic
behaviour of materials. For example while
designing a building, the structural design of
the columns, beams and supports require
knowledge of strength of materials used. Have
you ever thought why the beams used in
construction of bridges, as supports etc. have
a cross-section of the type I? Why does a heap
of sand or a hill have a pyramidal shape?
Answers to these questions can be obtained
from the study of structural engineering which
is based on concepts developed here.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 9 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS
175
Cranes used for lifting and moving heavy loads
from one place to another have a thick metal
rope to which the load is attached. The rope is
pulled up using pulleys and motors. Suppose we
want to make a crane, which has a lifting
capacity of 10 tonnes or metric tons (1 metric
ton = 1000 kg). How thick should the steel rope
be? We obviously want that the load does not
deform the rope permanently. Therefore, the
extension should not exceed the elastic limit.
From Table 8.1, we find that mild steel has a
yield strength (σy) of about 300 × 106 N m–2. Thus,
the area of cross-section (A) of the rope should
at least be
A ≥ W/σy  =  Mg/σy
(8.15)
=  (104 kg × 9.8 m s-2)/(300 × 106 N m-2)
=  3.3 × 10-4 m2
corresponding to a radius of about 1 cm for a
rope of circular cross-section. Generally a
large margin of safety (of about a factor of ten
in the load) is provided. Thus a thicker rope of
radius about 3 cm is recommended. A single
wire of this radius would practically be a rigid
rod. So the ropes are always made of a number
of thin wires braided together, like in pigtails,
for ease in manufacture, flexibility and strength.
A bridge has to be designed such that it can
withstand the load of the flowing traffic, the force
of winds and its own weight. Similarly, in the
design of buildings the use of beams and columns
is very common. In both the cases, the
overcoming of the problem of bending of beam
under a load is of prime importance. The beam
should not bend too much or break. Let us
consider the case of a beam loaded at the centre
and supported near its ends as shown in
Fig. 8.6.  A bar of length l, breadth b, and depth
d when loaded at the centre by a load W sags by
an amount given by
δ = W l 3/(4bd 3Y)
(8.16)
This relation can be derived using what you
have already learnt and a little calculus. From
Eq. (8.16), we see that to reduce the bending
for a given load, one should use a material with
a large Young’s modulus Y. For a given material,
increasing the depth d rather than the breadth
b is more effective in reducing the bending, since
δ  is proportional to d -3 and only to b-1(of course
the length l of the span should be as small as
possible). But on increasing the depth, unless
the load is exactly at the right place (difficult to
arrange in a bridge with moving traffic), the
deep bar  may bend as shown in Fig. 8.7(b). This
is called buckling. To avoid this, a common
compromise is the cross-sectional shape shown
in Fig. 8.7(c). This section provides a large load-
bearing surface and enough depth to prevent
bending. This shape reduces the weight of the
beam without sacrificing the strength and
hence reduces the cost.
Fig. 8.6
A beam supported at the ends and loaded
at the centre.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 8.7
Different cross-sectional shapes of a
beam. (a) Rectangular section of a bar;
(b) A thin bar and how it can buckle;
(c) Commonly used section for a load
bearing bar.
The use of pillars or columns is also very
common in buildings and bridges. A pillar with
rounded ends as shown in Fig. 8.9(a) supports
less load than that with a distributed shape at
the ends [Fig. 8.9(b)]. The precise design of a
bridge or a building has to take into account
the conditions under which it will function, the
cost and long period, reliability of usable
material, etc.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 10 :
 176
PHYSICS
SUMMARY
1.
Stress is the restoring force per unit area and strain is the fractional change in dimension.
In general there are three types of stresses (a) tensile stress — longitudinal stress
(associated with stretching) or compressive stress (associated with compression),
(b) shearing stress, and (c) hydraulic stress.
2.
For small deformations, stress is directly proportional to the strain for many materials.
This is known as Hooke’s law. The constant of proportionality is called modulus of
elasticity. Three elastic moduli viz., Young’s modulus, shear modulus and bulk modulus
are used to describe the elastic behaviour of objects as they respond to deforming forces
that act on them.
A class of solids called elastomers does not obey Hooke’s law.
3.
When an object is under tension or compression, the Hooke’s law takes the form
 F/A  = Y∆L/L
where  ∆L/L is the tensile or compressive strain of the object, F is the magnitude of the
applied force causing the strain, A is the cross-sectional area over which F is applied
(perpendicular to A) and Y is the Young’s modulus for the object. The stress is F/A.
4.
A pair of forces when applied parallel to the upper and lower faces, the solid deforms so
that the upper face moves sideways with respect to the lower. The horizontal displacement
∆L of the upper face is perpendicular to the vertical height L. This type of deformation is
called shear and the corresponding stress is the shearing stress. This type of stress is
possible only in solids.
In this kind of deformation the Hooke’s law takes the form
F/A = G × ∆L/L
where ∆L is the displacement of one end of object in the direction of the applied force F,
and G is the shear modulus.
5.
When an object undergoes hydraulic compression due to a stress exerted by a surrounding
fluid, the Hooke’s law takes the form
p = B (∆V/V),
where p is the pressure (hydraulic stress) on the object due to the fluid, ∆V/V  (the
volume strain) is the absolute fractional change in the object’s volume due to that
pressure and B is the bulk modulus of the object.
                    (a)                         (b)
Fig. 8.8
Pillars or columns: (a) a pillar with rounded
ends, (b) Pillar with distributed ends.
The answer to the question why the maximum
height of a mountain on earth is ~10 km can
also be provided by considering the elastic
properties of rocks. A mountain base is not under
uniform compression and this provides some
shearing stress to the rocks under which they
can flow. The stress due to all the material on
the top should be less than the critical shearing
stress at which the rocks flow.
At the bottom of a mountain of height h, the
force per unit area due to the weight of the
mountain is hρg where ρ is the density of the
material of the mountain and g is the acceleration
due to gravity. The material at the bottom
experiences this force in the vertical direction,
and the sides of the mountain are free. Therefore,
this is not a case of pressure or bulk compression.
There is a shear component, approximately hρg
itself. Now the elastic limit for a typical rock is
30 × 107 N m-2. Equating this to hρg, with
ρ  = 3 × 103 kg m-3 gives
hρg  = 30 × 107 N m-2 .
h      =  30 × 107 N m-2/(3 × 103 kg m-3 × 10 m s-2)
      = 10 km
which is more than the height of Mt. Everest!
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 11 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS
177
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
In the case of a wire, suspended from celing and stretched under the action of a weight (F)
suspended from its other end, the force exerted by the ceiling on it is  equal and opposite to
the weight. However, the tension at any cross-section A of the wire is just F and not 2F.
Hence, tensile stress which is equal to the tension per unit area is equal to F/A.
2.
Hooke’s law is valid only in the linear part of stress-strain curve.
3.
The Young’s modulus and shear modulus are relevant only for solids since only solids
have lengths and shapes.
4.
Bulk modulus is relevant for solids, liquid and gases.  It refers to the change in volume
when every part of the body is under the uniform stress so that the shape of the body
remains unchanged.
5.
Metals have larger values of Young’s modulus than alloys and elastomers. A material
with large value of Young’s modulus requires a large force to produce small changes in its
length.
6.
In daily life, we feel that a material which stretches more is more elastic, but it a is
misnomer. In fact material which stretches to a lesser extent for a given load is considered
to be more elastic.
7.
In general, a deforming force in one direction can produce strains in other directions
also. The proportionality between stress and strain in such situations cannot be described
by just one elastic constant.  For example, for a wire under longitudinal strain, the
lateral dimensions (radius of cross section) will undergo a small change, which is described
by another elastic constant of the material (called Poisson ratio).
8.
Stress is not a vector quantity since, unlike a force, the stress cannot be assigned a
specific direction. Force acting on the portion of a body on a specified side of a section
has a definite direction.
EXERCISES
8.1
A steel wire of length 4.7 m and cross-sectional area 3.0 × 10-5 m2 stretches by the same
amount as a copper wire of length 3.5 m and cross-sectional area of 4.0 × 10–5 m2 under
a given load. What is the ratio of the Young’s modulus of steel to that of copper?
8.2
Figure 8.9 shows the strain-stress curve for a given material. What are (a) Young’s
modulus and (b) approximate yield strength for this material?
Fig. 8.9
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 12 :
 178
PHYSICS
8.3
The stress-strain graphs for materials A and B are shown in Fig. 8.10.
Fig. 8.10
The graphs are drawn to the same scale.
(a)
Which of the materials has the greater Young’s modulus?
(b)
Which of the two is the stronger material?
8.4
Read the following two statements below carefully and state, with reasons, if it is true
or false.
(a)
The Young’s modulus of rubber is greater than that of steel;
(b)
The stretching of a coil is determined by its shear modulus.
8.5
Two wires of diameter 0.25 cm, one made of steel and the other made of brass are loaded
as shown in Fig. 8.11. The unloaded length of steel wire is 1.5 m and that of brass wire
is 1.0 m. Compute the elongations of the steel and the brass wires.
Fig. 8.11
8.6
The edge of an aluminium cube is 10 cm long. One face of the cube is firmly fixed to a
vertical wall. A mass of 100 kg is then attached to the opposite face of the cube. The
shear modulus of aluminium is 25 GPa. What is the vertical deflection of this face?
8.7
Four identical hollow cylindrical columns of mild steel support a big structure of mass
50,000 kg. The inner and outer radii of each column are 30 and 60 cm respectively.
Assuming the load distribution to be uniform, calculate the compressional strain of
each column.
8.8
A piece of copper having a rectangular cross-section of 15.2 mm × 19.1 mm is pulled in
tension with 44,500 N force, producing only elastic deformation. Calculate the resulting
strain?
8.9
A steel cable with a radius of 1.5 cm supports a chairlift at a ski area. If the maximum
stress is not to exceed 108 N m–2, what is the maximum load the cable can support ?
8.10 A rigid bar of mass 15 kg is supported symmetrically by three wires each 2.0 m long.
Those at each end are of copper and the middle one is of iron. Determine the ratios of
their diameters if each is to have the same tension.
8.11 A 14.5 kg mass, fastened to the end of a steel wire of unstretched length 1.0 m, is
whirled in a vertical circle with an angular velocity of 2 rev/s at the bottom of the circle.
The cross-sectional area of the wire is 0.065 cm2. Calculate the elongation of the wire
when the mass is at the lowest point of its path.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 01 - Page 13 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS
179
8.12 Compute the bulk modulus of water from the following data: Initial volume = 100.0
litre, Pressure increase = 100.0 atm (1 atm = 1.013 × 105 Pa), Final volume = 100.5 litre.
Compare the bulk modulus of water with that of air (at constant temperature). Explain
in simple terms why the ratio is so large.
8.13 What is the density of water at a depth where pressure is 80.0 atm, given that its
density at the surface is 1.03 × 103 kg m–3?
8.14 Compute the fractional change in volume of a  glass slab, when subjected to a hydraulic
pressure of 10 atm.
8.15 Determine the volume contraction of a solid copper cube, 10 cm on an edge, when
subjected to a hydraulic pressure of 7.0 × 106 Pa.
8.16 How much should the pressure on a litre of water be changed to compress it by 0.10%?
carry one quarter of the load.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 1 :
 CHAPTER NINE
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
9.1 INTRODUCTION
In this chapter, we shall study  some common physical
properties of liquids and gases. Liquids and gases can  flow
and are therefore, called  fluids.  It is this property that
distinguishes liquids and gases from solids in a basic way.
Fluids are everywhere around us. Earth has an envelop of
air and two-thirds of its surface is covered with water.  Water
is not only necessary for our existence; every mammalian
body constitute mostly of water. All the  processes occurring
in living beings including plants are mediated by fluids. Thus
understanding the behaviour and properties of fluids is
important.
How are fluids different from solids? What is common in
liquids and gases? Unlike  a solid, a fluid has no definite
shape of its own. Solids and liquids have a fixed volume,
whereas a gas fills the entire volume of its container. We
have learnt in the previous chapter that the volume of solids
can be changed by stress. The volume of solid, liquid or gas
depends on the stress or pressure acting on it. When we
talk about fixed volume of solid or liquid, we mean its volume
under atmospheric pressure. The difference between gases
and solids or liquids is that for solids or liquids the change
in volume due to  change of external pressure is rather small.
In other words solids and liquids have much lower
compressibility as compared to gases.
Shear stress can change the shape of a solid keeping its
volume fixed. The key property of fluids is that they offer
very little resistance to shear stress; their shape changes by
application of very small shear stress. The shearing stress
of fluids is about million times smaller than that of solids.
9.2  PRESSURE
A sharp needle when pressed against our skin pierces it. Our
skin, however, remains intact when a blunt object with a
wider contact area (say the back of a spoon) is pressed against
it with the same force. If an elephant were to step on a man’s
chest, his ribs would crack. A circus performer across whose
9.1
Introduction
9.2
Pressure
9.3
Streamline flow
9.4
Bernoulli’s principle
9.5
Viscosity
9.6
Surface tension
Summary
Points to ponder
Exercises
Additional exercises
Appendix
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 2 :
 chest a large, light but strong wooden plank is
placed first, is saved from this accident. Such
everyday experiences convince us that both the
force and its coverage area are important. Smaller
the area on which the force acts, greater is the
impact. This impact is known as pressure.
When an object is submerged in a fluid at
rest, the fluid exerts a force on its surface. This
force is always normal to the object’s surface.
This is so because if there were a component of
force parallel to the surface, the object will also
exert a force on the fluid parallel to it; as a
consequence of Newton’s third law. This force
will cause the fluid to flow parallel to the surface.
Since the fluid is at rest, this cannot happen.
Hence, the force exerted by the fluid at rest has
to be perpendicular to the surface in contact
with it. This is shown in Fig.9.1(a).
The normal force exerted by the fluid at a point
may be measured. An idealised form of one such
pressure-measuring device is shown in Fig.
9.1(b). It consists of an evacuated chamber with
a spring that is calibrated to measure the force
acting on the piston. This device is placed at a
point inside the fluid. The inward force exerted
by the fluid on the piston is balanced by the
outward spring force and is thereby measured.
If F is the magnitude of this normal force on the
piston of area A then the average pressure Pav
is defined as the normal force acting per unit
area.
P
F
A
av =
             (9.1)
In principle, the piston area can be made
arbitrarily small. The pressure is then defined
in a limiting sense as
P = lim
∆A
0
→
∆
∆
F
A
(9.2)
Pressure is a scalar quantity. We remind the
reader that it is the component of the force
normal to the area under consideration and not
the (vector) force that appears in the numerator
in Eqs. (9.1) and (9.2). Its dimensions are
[ML–1T–2]. The SI unit of pressure is N m–2. It has
been named as pascal (Pa) in honour of the
French scientist Blaise Pascal (1623-1662) who
carried out pioneering studies on fluid pressure.
A common unit of pressure is the atmosphere
(atm), i.e. the pressure exerted by the
atmosphere at sea level (1 atm = 1.013 × 105 Pa).
Another quantity, that is indispensable in
describing fluids, is the density ρ. For a fluid of
mass m occupying volume V,
ρ = m
V
(9.3)
The dimensions of density are [ML–3]. Its SI
unit is kg m–3. It is a positive scalar quantity. A
liquid is largely incompressible and its density
is therefore, nearly constant at all pressures.
Gases, on the other hand exhibit a large
variation in densities with pressure.
The density of water at 4oC (277 K) is
1.0 × 103 kg m–3. The relative density of a
substance is the ratio of its density to the
density of water at 4oC. It is a dimensionless
positive scalar quantity. For example the relative
density of aluminium is 2.7. Its density is
2.7 × 103 kg m–3
.  The densities of some common
fluids are displayed in Table 9.1.
Table 9.1
Densities of some common fluids
at STP*
(a)
(b)
Fig. 9.1
(a) The force exerted by the liquid in the
beaker on the submerged object or on the
walls is normal (perpendicular) to the
surface at all points.
(b) An idealised device for measuring
pressure.
* STP means standard temperature (00C) and 1 atm pressure.
MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
181
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 3 :
 182
PHYSICS
⊳
Example 9.1   The two thigh bones (femurs),
each of cross-sectional area10 cm2 support
the upper part of a human body of mass 40
kg. Estimate the average pressure
sustained by the femurs.
Answer   Total cross-sectional area of the
femurs is A = 2 × 10 cm2 = 20 × 10–4 m2. The
force acting on them is F = 40 kg wt = 400 N
(taking g = 10 m s–2). This force is acting
vertically down and hence, normally on the
femurs. Thus, the average pressure is
2
5
m
 
N
 
10
 
 
2
 
 
 
 
−
×
=
= A
F
Pav
                            ⊳
9.2.1 Pascal’s Law
The French scientist Blaise Pascal observed that
the pressure in a fluid at rest is the same at all
points if they are at the same height. This fact
may be demonstrated in a simple way.
Fig. 9.2 shows an element in the interior of a
fluid at rest. This element ABC-DEF is in the
form of a right-angled prism. In principle, this
prismatic element is very small so that every
part of it can be considered at the same depth
from the liquid surface and therefore, the effect
of the gravity is the same at all these points.
But for clarity we have enlarged this element.
The forces on this element are those exerted by
the rest of the fluid and they must be normal to
the surfaces of the element as discussed above.
Thus, the fluid exerts pressures Pa, Pb and Pc on
this element of area corresponding to the normal
forces Fa, Fb and Fc as shown in Fig. 9.2 on the
faces BEFC, ADFC and ADEB denoted by Aa, Ab
and Ac respectively. Then
Fb sinθ = Fc,
Fb cosθ = Fa (by equilibrium)
Ab sinθ = Ac,
Ab cosθ = Aa (by geometry)
Thus,
;
b
c
a
b
c
a
b
c
a
F
F
F
P
P
P
A
A
A
=
=
=
=
(9.4)
Hence, pressure exerted is same in all
directions in a fluid at rest. It again reminds us
that like other types of stress, pressure is not a
vector quantity. No direction can be assigned
to it.  The force against any area within (or
bounding) a fluid at rest and under pressure is
normal to the area, regardless of the orientation
of the area.
Now consider a fluid element in the form of a
horizontal bar of uniform cross-section. The bar
is in equilibrium. The horizontal forces exerted
at its two ends  must be balanced or the
pressure at the two ends should be equal. This
proves that for a liquid in equilibrium the
pressure is same at all points in a horizontal
plane. Suppose the pressure were not equal in
different parts of the fluid, then there would be
a flow as the  fluid will have some net force
acting on it. Hence in the absence of flow the
pressure in the fluid must be same everywhere
in a horizontal plane.
9.2.2 Variation of Pressure with Depth
Consider a fluid at rest in a container. In
Fig. 9.3 point 1 is at height h above a point 2.
The pressures at points 1 and 2 are P1 and P2
respectively. Consider a cylindrical element of
fluid having area of base A and height h. As the
fluid is at rest the resultant horizontal forces
should be zero and the resultant vertical forces
should balance the weight of the element. The
forces acting in the vertical direction are due to
the fluid pressure at the top (P1A) acting
downward, at the bottom (P2A) acting upward.
If mg is weight of the fluid in the cylinder we
have
(P2 − P1) A = mg
(9.5)
Now, if ρ is the mass density of the fluid, we
have the mass of fluid to be m = ρV= ρhA so
that
P2 − P1=  ρgh
(9.6)
Fig. 9.2
Proof of Pascal’s law. ABC-DEF is an
element of the interior of a fluid at rest.
This element is in the form of a right-
angled prism. The element is small so that
the effect of gravity can be ignored, but it
has been enlarged for the sake of clarity.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 4 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
183
⊳
Fig.9.3
Fluid under gravity. The effect of gravity is
illustrated through pressure on a vertical
cylindrical column.
Pressure difference depends on the vertical
distance h between the points (1 and 2), mass
density of the fluid ρ and acceleration due to
gravity g. If the point 1 under discussion is
shifted to the top of the  fluid (say, water), which
is open to the atmosphere, P1 may be replaced
by atmospheric pressure (Pa) and we replace P2
by P. Then Eq. (9.6) gives
P = Pa + ρgh
(9.7)
Thus, the pressure P, at depth below the
surface of a liquid open to the atmosphere is
greater than atmospheric pressure by an
amount ρgh. The excess of pressure, P − Pa, at
depth h is called a gauge pressure at that point.
The area of the cylinder is not appearing in
the expression of absolute pressure in Eq. (9.7).
Thus, the height of the fluid column is important
and not cross-sectional or base area or the shape
of the container. The liquid pressure is the same
at all points at the same horizontal level (same
depth).  The result is appreciated through the
example of hydrostatic paradox. Consider three
vessels A, B and C  [Fig.9.4] of different shapes.
They are connected at the bottom by a horizontal
pipe. On filling with water, the level in the three
vessels is the same, though they hold different
amounts of water. This is so because water at
the bottom has the same pressure below each
section of the vessel.
Fig 9.4
Illustration of hydrostatic paradox. The
three vessels A, B and C contain different
amounts of liquids, all upto the same
height.
Example 9.2 What is the pressure on a
swimmer 10 m below the surface of a lake?
Answer Here
h = 10 m and ρ = 1000 kg m-3. Take g = 10 m s–2
From Eq. (9.7)
P = Pa + ρgh
   = 1.01 × 105 Pa + 1000 kg m–3 × 10 m s–2 × 10 m
   = 2.01 × 105 Pa
    ≈ 2 atm
This is a 100% increase in pressure from
surface level. At a depth of 1 km, the increase
in pressure is 100 atm! Submarines are designed
to withstand such enormous pressures.   ⊳
9.2.3
Atmospheric Pressure and
Gauge Pressure
The pressure of the atmosphere at any point is
equal to the weight of a column of air of unit
cross-sectional area extending from that point
to the top of the atmosphere. At sea level, it is
1.013 × 105 Pa (1 atm). Italian scientist
Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647) devised for
the first time a method for measuring
atmospheric pressure. A long glass tube closed
at one end and filled with mercury is inverted
into a trough of mercury as shown in Fig.9.5 (a).
This device is known as ‘mercury barometer’.
The space above the mercury column in the tube
contains only mercury vapour whose pressure
P is so small  that it may be neglected. Thus,
the pressure at Point A=0. The pressure inside
the coloumn at Point B must be the same as the
pressure at Point C, which is atmospheric
pressure, Pa.
Pa = ρgh
(9.8)
where ρ is the density of mercury and h is the
height of the mercury column in the tube.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 5 :
 184
PHYSICS
⊳
⊳
In the experiment it is found that the mercury
column in the barometer has a height of about
76 cm at sea level equivalent to one atmosphere
(1 atm). This can also be obtained using the
value of ρ in Eq. (9.8). A common way of stating
pressure is in terms of cm or mm of mercury
(Hg). A pressure equivalent of 1 mm is called a
torr (after Torricelli).
1 torr = 133 Pa.
The mm of Hg and torr are used in medicine
and physiology. In meteorology, a common unit
is the bar and millibar.
1 bar = 105 Pa
An open tube manometer is a useful
instrument for measuring pressure differences.
It consists of a U-tube containing a suitable
liquid i.e., a low density liquid (such as oil) for
measuring small pressure differences and a
high density liquid (such as mercury) for large
pressure differences. One end of the tube is open
to the atmosphere and the other end is
connected to the system whose pressure we want
to measure [see Fig. 9.5 (b)]. The pressure P at A
is equal to pressure at point B. What we
normally measure is the gauge pressure, which
is P − Pa, given by Eq. (9.8) and is proportional to
manometer height h.
Pressure is same at the same level on both
sides of the U-tube containing a fluid. For
liquids, the density varies very little over wide
ranges in pressure and temperature and we can
treat it safely as a constant for our present
purposes. Gases on the other hand, exhibits
large variations of densities with changes in
pressure and temperature. Unlike gases, liquids
are, therefore, largely treated as incompressible.
Example 9.3 The density of the
atmosphere at sea level is 1.29 kg/m3.
Assume that it does not change with
altitude. Then how high would the
atmosphere extend?
Answer We use Eq. (9.7)
ρgh  =  1.29 kg m–3 × 9.8 m s2 × h  m = 1.01 × 105 Pa
∴ h = 7989 m ≈ 8 km
In reality the density of air decreases with
height. So does the value of g. The atmospheric
cover extends with decreasing pressure over
100 km. We should also note that the sea level
atmospheric pressure is not always 760 mm of
Hg. A drop in the Hg level by 10 mm or more is a
sign of an approaching storm.
⊳
Example 9.4 At a depth of 1000 m in an
ocean (a) what is the absolute pressure?
(b) What is the gauge pressure? (c) Find
the force acting on the window of area
20 cm × 20 cm of a submarine at this depth,
the interior of which is maintained at sea-
level atmospheric pressure. (The density of
sea water is 1.03 × 103 kg m-3,
g = 10 m s–2.)
(b) The open tube manometer
Fig 9.5  Two pressure measuring devices.
Fig 9.5 (a) The mercury barometer.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 6 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
185
⊳
Answer Here h = 1000 m and ρ = 1.03 × 103 kg m-3.
(a)
From Eq. (9.6), absolute pressure
P = Pa + ρgh
= 1.01 × 105 Pa
   + 1.03 × 103 kg m–3  × 10 m s–2 × 1000 m
=  104.01 × 105 Pa
≈ 104 atm
(b)
Gauge pressure is P − Pa = ρgh = Pg
Pg = 1.03 × 103 kg m–3 × 10 ms2 × 1000 m
    = 103 × 105 Pa
     ≈ 103 atm
(c)
The pressure outside the submarine is
P = Pa + ρgh and the pressure inside it is Pa.
Hence, the net pressure acting on the
window is gauge pressure, Pg = ρgh. Since
the area of the window is A = 0.04 m2, the
force acting on it is
F = Pg A = 103 × 105 Pa × 0.04 m2 = 4.12 × 105 N
  ⊳
9.2.4  Hydraulic Machines
Let us now consider what happens when we
change the pressure on a fluid contained in a
vessel. Consider a horizontal cylinder with a
piston and three vertical tubes at different points
[Fig. 9.6 (a)]. The pressure in the horizontal
cylinder is indicated by the height of liquid
column in the vertical tubes. It is necessarily
the same in all. If we push the piston, the fluid
level rises in all the tubes, again reaching the
same level in each one of them.
law. In these devices, fluids are used for
transmitting pressure. In a hydraulic lift, as
shown in Fig. 9.6 (b), two pistons are separated
by the space filled with a liquid. A piston of small
cross-section A1 is used to exert a force F1 directly
on the liquid. The pressure P = 
1
1
F
A
 is
transmitted throughout the liquid to the larger
cylinder attached with a larger piston of area A2,
which results in an upward force of P × A2.
Therefore, the piston is capable of supporting a
large force (large weight of, say a car, or a truck,
placed on the platform) F2 = PA2 = 
1
2
1
F A
A
. By
changing the force at A1, the platform can be
moved up or down. Thus, the applied force has
been increased by a factor of 
2
1
A
A  and this factor
is the mechanical advantage of the device. The
example below clarifies it.
Fig 9.6  (a) Whenever external pressure is applied
   on any part of a fluid in a vessel, it is
equally transmitted in all directions.
     This indicates that when the pressure  on the
cylinder was increased, it was distributed
uniformly throughout. We can say  whenever
external pressure is applied on any part of a
fluid contained in a vessel, it is transmitted
undiminished and equally in all directions.
This is another form of the Pascal’s law and it
has many applications in daily life.
A number of devices, such as hydraulic lift
and hydraulic brakes, are based on the Pascal’s
Fig 9.6 (b) Schematic diagram illustrating the principle
  behind the hydraulic lift, a device used
  to lift heavy loads.
Example 9.5 Two syringes of different
cross-sections (without needles) filled with
water are connected with a tightly fitted
rubber tube filled with water. Diameters of
the smaller piston and larger piston are
1.0 cm and 3.0 cm respectively. (a)  Find
the force exerted on  the larger piston when
a force of 10 N is applied to the smaller
piston. (b) If the smaller piston is pushed
in through 6.0 cm, how much does the
larger piston move out?
Answer (a) Since pressure is transmitted
undiminished throughout the fluid,
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 7 :
 186
PHYSICS
⊳
(
)
(
)
2
–2
2
2
1
2
–2
1
3/2
10
m
10 N
1/2
10
m
A
F
F
A
π
π
×
=
=
×
×
             = 90 N
(b) Water is considered to be perfectly
incompressible. Volume covered by the
movement of smaller piston inwards is equal to
volume moved outwards due to the larger piston.
2
2
1
1
A
L
A
L
=
       j 0.67 × 10-2 m = 0.67 cm
Note, atmospheric pressure is common to both
pistons and has been ignored.
⊳
Example 9.6 In a car lift compressed air
exerts a force F1 on a small piston having
a radius of 5.0 cm. This pressure is
transmitted to a second piston of radius
15 cm (Fig 9.7). If the mass of the car to be
lifted is 1350 kg, calculate F1. What is the
pressure necessary to accomplish this
task? (g = 9.8 ms-2).
Answer Since pressure is transmitted
undiminished throughout the fluid,
= 1470 N
≈ 1.5 × 103 N
The air pressure that will produce this
force is
This is almost double the atmospheric
pressure.                       ⊳
Hydraulic brakes in automobiles also work on
the same principle. When we apply a little force
on the pedal with our foot the master piston
moves inside the master cylinder, and the
pressure caused is transmitted through the
brake oil to act on a piston of larger area. A large
force acts on the piston and is pushed down
expanding the brake shoes against brake lining.
In this way, a small force on the pedal produces
a large retarding force on the wheel. An
important advantage of the system is that the
pressure set up by pressing pedal is transmitted
equally to all cylinders attached to the four
wheels so that the braking effort is equal on
all wheels.
9.3  STREAMLINE FLOW
So far we have studied fluids at rest. The study
of the fluids in motion is known as fluid
dynamics. When a water tap is turned on slowly,
the water flow is smooth initially, but loses its
smoothness when the speed of the outflow is
increased. In studying the motion of fluids, we
focus our attention on what is happening to
various fluid particles at a particular point in
space at a particular time. The flow of the fluid
is said to be steady if at any given point, the
velocity of each passing fluid particle remains
constant in time. This does not mean that the
velocity at different points in space is same. The
velocity of a particular particle may change as it
moves from one point to another. That is, at some
other point the particle may have a different
velocity, but every other particle which passes
the second point behaves exactly as the previous
particle that has just passed that point. Each
particle follows a smooth path, and the paths of
the particles do not cross each other.
Fig. 9.7
The meaning of streamlines. (a) A typical
trajectory of a fluid particle.
(b) A region of streamline flow.
The path taken by a fluid particle under a
steady flow is a streamline. It is defined as a
curve whose tangent at any point is in the
direction of the fluid velocity at that point.
Consider the path of a particle as shown in
Fig.9.7 (a), the curve describes how a fluid
particle moves with time. The curve PQ is like a
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 8 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
187
permanent map of fluid flow, indicating how the
fluid streams. No two streamlines can cross, for
if they do, an oncoming fluid particle can go
either one way or the other and the flow would
not be steady. Hence, in steady flow, the map of
flow is stationary in time. How do we draw closely
spaced streamlines ? If we intend to show
streamline of every flowing particle, we would
end up with a continuum of lines. Consider planes
perpendicular to the direction of fluid flow e.g.,
at three points P, R and Q in Fig.9.7 (b). The plane
pieces are so chosen that their boundaries be
determined by the same set of streamlines. This
means that number of fluid particles crossing
the surfaces as indicated at P, R and Q is the
same. If area of cross-sections at these points
are AP,AR and AQ and speeds of fluid particles
are vP, vR and vQ, then mass of fluid ∆mP crossing
at AP in a small interval of time ∆t is ρPAPvP ∆t.
Similarly mass of fluid ∆mR flowing or crossing
at AR in a small interval of time ∆t is  ρRARvR ∆t
and mass of fluid  ∆mQ is ρQAQvQ ∆t crossing at
AQ. The mass of liquid flowing out equals the
mass flowing in, holds in all cases. Therefore,
ρPAPvP∆t = ρRARvR∆t = ρQAQvQ∆t
(9.9)
For flow of incompressible fluids
ρP = ρR = ρQ
Equation (9.9) reduces to
APvP = ARvR = AQvQ
(9.10)
which is called the equation of continuity and
it is a statement of conservation of mass in flow
of incompressible fluids. In general
Av = constant
(9.11)
Av gives the volume flux or flow rate and
remains constant throughout the pipe of flow.
Thus, at narrower portions where the
streamlines are closely spaced, velocity
increases and its vice versa. From (Fig 9.7b) it
is clear that AR  > AQ or   vR <  vQ, the fluid is
accelerated while passing from R to Q. This is
associated with a change in pressure in fluid
flow in horizontal pipes.
Steady flow is achieved at low flow speeds.
Beyond a limiting value, called critical speed,
this flow loses steadiness and becomes
turbulent. One sees this when a fast flowing
stream encounters rocks, small foamy
whirlpool-like regions called ‘white water
rapids are formed.
Figure 9.8 displays streamlines for some
typical flows. For example, Fig. 9.8(a) describes
a laminar flow where the velocities at different
points in the fluid may have different magnitudes
but their directions are parallel. Figure 9.8 (b)
gives a sketch of turbulent flow.
Fig. 9.8
(a) Some streamlines for fluid flow.
(b) A jet of air striking a flat plate placed
perpendicular to it. This is an example
of turbulent flow.
9.4  BERNOULLI’S PRINCIPLE
Fluid flow is a complex phenomenon. But we
can obtain some useful properties for steady
or streamline flows using the conservation
of energy.
Consider a fluid moving in a pipe of varying
cross-sectional area. Let the pipe be at varying
heights as shown in Fig. 9.9. We now suppose
that an incompressible fluid is flowing through
the pipe in a steady flow. Its velocity must
change as a consequence of equation of
continuity. A force is required to produce this
acceleration, which is caused by the fluid
surrounding it, the pressure must be different
in different regions. Bernoulli’s equation is a
general expression that relates the pressure
difference between two points in a pipe to both
velocity changes (kinetic energy change) and
elevation (height) changes (potential energy
change). The Swiss Physicist Daniel Bernoulli
developed this relationship in 1738.
Consider the flow at two regions 1 (i.e., BC)
and 2 (i.e., DE). Consider the fluid initially lying
between B and D. In an infinitesimal time
interval ∆t, this fluid would have moved. Suppose
v1 is the speed at B and v2 at D, then fluid initially
at B has moved a distance v1∆t to C (v1∆t is small
enough to assume constant cross-section along
BC). In the same interval ∆t the fluid initially at
D moves to E, a distance equal to v2∆t. Pressures
P1 and P2 act as shown on the plane faces of
areas A1 and A2 binding the two regions. The
work done on the fluid at left end (BC) is W1 =
P1A1(v1∆t) = P1∆V. Since the same volume ∆V
passes through both the regions (from the
equation of continuity) the work done by the fluid
at the other end (DE) is W2 = P2A2(v2∆t) = P2∆V or,
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 9 :
 188
PHYSICS
the work done on the fluid is  –P2∆V. So the total
work done on the fluid is
W1 – W2 =  (P1− P2) ∆V
Part of this work goes into changing the kinetic
energy of the fluid, and part goes into changing
the gravitational potential energy. If the density
of the fluid is ρ and ∆m = ρA1v1∆t = ρ∆V is the
mass passing through the pipe in time ∆t, then
change in gravitational potential energy is
∆U = ρg∆V (h2 − h1)
The change in its kinetic energy is
∆K = 
1
2
 
 
 
 
 
  ρ ∆V (v2
2 − v1
2)
We can employ the work – energy theorem
(Chapter 6) to this volume of the fluid and
this yields
(P1− P2) ∆V = 
1
2
 
 
 
 
 
  ρ ∆V (v2
2 − v1
2) + ρg∆V (h2 − h1)
We now divide each term by ∆V to obtain
(P1− P2) = 
1
2
 
 
 
 
 
  ρ (v2
2 − v1
2) + ρg (h2 − h1)
We can rearrange the above terms to obtain
P1 + 
1
2
 
 
 
 
 
  ρv1
2 + ρgh1 = P2+ 
1
2
 
 
 
 
 
  ρv2
2 + ρgh2
     (9.12)
This is Bernoulli’s equation. Since 1 and 2
refer to any two locations along the pipeline, we
may write the expression in general as
 P + 
1
2
 
 
 
 
 
 ρv2 + ρgh = constant
(9.13)
In words, the Bernoulli’s relation may be
stated as follows: As we move along a streamline
the sum of the pressure (P), the kinetic energy
per unit volume 
ρv2
2



 and the potential energy
per unit volume (ρgh) remains a constant.
Note that in applying the energy conservation
principle, there is an assumption that no energy
is lost due to friction. But in fact, when fluids
flow, some energy does get lost due to internal
friction. This arises due to the fact that in a fluid
flow, the different layers of the fluid flow with
different velocities. These layers exert frictional
forces on each other resulting in a loss of energy.
This property of the fluid is called viscosity and
is discussed in more detail in a later section. The
lost kinetic energy of the fluid gets converted into
heat energy. Thus, Bernoulli’s equation ideally
applies to fluids with zero viscosity or non-
viscous fluids. Another restriction on application
of Bernoulli theorem is that the fluids must be
incompressible, as the elastic energy of the fluid
is also not taken into consideration. In practice,
it has a large number of useful applications and
can help explain a wide variety of phenomena
for low viscosity incompressible fluids.
Bernoulli’s equation also does not hold for non-
steady or turbulent flows, because in that
situation velocity and pressure are constantly
fluctuating in time.
When a fluid is at rest i.e., its velocity is zero
everywhere, Bernoulli’s equation becomes
P1 + ρgh1 = P2 + ρgh2
(P1− P2) = ρg (h2 − h1)
which is same as Eq. (9.6).
9.4.1 Speed of Efflux: Torricelli’s Law
The word efflux means fluid outflow. Torricelli
discovered that the speed of efflux from an open
tank is given by a formula identical to that of a
freely falling body. Consider a tank containing
a liquid of density ρ with a small hole in its side
at a height y1 from the bottom (see Fig. 9.10).
The air above the liquid, whose surface is at
height y2, is at pressure P. From the equation of
continuity [Eq. (9.10)] we have
v1 A1 = v2 A2
v
A
A
v
2
1
2
=
1
Fig. 9.9
The flow of an ideal fluid in a pipe of varying
cross section. The fluid in a section of length
v1∆t moves to the section of length v2∆t in
time ∆t.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 10 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
189
If the cross-sectional area of the tank A2 is
much larger than that of the hole (A2 >>A1), then
we may take the fluid to be approximately at rest
at the top, i.e., v2 = 0. Now, applying the Bernoulli
equation at points 1 and 2 and noting that at
the hole P1 = Pa, the atmospheric pressure, we
have from Eq. (9.12)
2
1
1
2
1
2
a
P  
v
g y
P
g y
   
    
  
 
   
+
ρ
+ ρ
=
+ ρ
Taking  y2 – y1 = h we have
(
)
2
2
a
1
P
P
v
g h
  
   
−
=
+
ρ
(9.14)
When P >>Pa and 2 g h may be ignored, the
speed of efflux is determined by the container
pressure. Such a situation occurs in rocket
propulsion. On the other hand, if the tank is
open to the atmosphere, then P  = Pa and
h
g
v
 
 
 
2
1 =
(9.15)
This is also the speed of a freely falling body.
Equation (9.15) represents Torricelli’s law.
9.4.2 Dynamic Lift
Dynamic lift is the force that acts on a body,
such as airplane wing, a hydrofoil or a spinning
ball, by virtue of its motion through a fluid. In
many games such as cricket, tennis, baseball,
or golf, we notice that a spinning ball deviates
from its parabolic trajectory as it moves through
air. This deviation can be partly explained on
the basis of Bernoulli’s principle.
(i)
Ball moving without spin: Fig. 9.11(a)
shows the streamlines around a
non-spinning ball moving relative to a
fluid. From the symmetry of streamlines
it is clear that the velocity of fluid (air)
above and below the ball at corresponding
points is the same resulting in zero
pressure difference. The air therefore,
exerts no upward or downward force on
the ball.
(ii) Ball moving with spin: A ball which is
spinning drags air along with it. If the
surface is rough more air will be dragged.
Fig 9.11(b) shows  the streamlines of air
for a ball which is moving and spinning
at the same time. The ball is moving
forward and relative to it the air is moving
backwards. Therefore, the velocity of air
above the ball relative to the ball is larger
and below it is smaller (see Section 9.3).
The stream lines, thus, get crowded above
and rarified below.
This difference in the velocities of air results
in the pressure difference between the lower and
upper faces and there is a net upward force on
the ball. This dynamic lift due to spining is called
Magnus effect.
Aerofoil or lift on aircraft wing: Figure 9.11
(c) shows an aerofoil, which is a solid piece
shaped to provide an upward dynamic lift
when it moves horizontally through air. The
cross-section of the wings of an aeroplane
looks somewhat like the aerofoil shown in Fig.
9.11 (c) with streamlines around it. When the
aerofoil moves against the wind, the
orientation of the wing relative to flow direction
causes the streamlines to crowd together
above the wing more than those below it. The
flow speed on top is higher than that below it.
There is an upward force resulting in a
dynamic lift of the wings and this balances
the weight of the plane. The following example
illustrates this.
Fig. 9.10
Torricelli’s law. The speed of efflux, v1,
from the side of the container is given by
the application of Bernoulli’s equation.
If the container is open at the top to the
atmosphere then 
1 
 2  h
v
g
=
.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 11 :
 190
PHYSICS
⊳
Example 9.7 A fully loaded Boeing aircraft
has a mass of 3.3 × 105 kg. Its total wing
area is 500 m2. It is in level flight with a
speed of 960 km/h. (a) Estimate the
pressure difference between the lower and
upper surfaces of the wings (b) Estimate
the fractional increase in the speed of the
air on the upper surface of the wing relative
to the lower surface. [The density of air is ρ
= 1.2 kg m-3]
Answer (a) The weight of the Boeing aircraft is
balanced by the upward force due to the
pressure difference
∆P × A = 3.3 × 105 kg × 9.8
P
∆
= (3.3 × 105 kg × 9.8 m s–2) / 500 m2
      = 6.5 ×103 Nm-2
(b) We ignore the small height difference
between the top and bottom sides in Eq. (9.12).
The pressure difference between them is
then
∆P
v
v
=
(
)
ρ
2
2
2
1
2
–
where v2 is the speed of air over the upper
surface and v1 is the speed under the bottom
surface.
v
v
P
v
v
2
1
2
1
2
–
(
)=
+
(
)
∆
ρ
Taking the average speed
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig 9.11
(a) Fluid streaming past a static sphere. (b) Streamlines for a fluid around a sphere spinning  clockwise.
(c) Air flowing past an aerofoil.
vav = (v2 + v1)/2 = 960 km/h = 267 m s-1,
we have
v
v
v
P
v
2
1
2
–
/
(
)
=
av
av
∆
ρ
≈ 0.08
The speed above the wing needs to be only 8
% higher than that below.
⊳
9.5  VISCOSITY
Most of the fluids are not ideal ones and offer some
resistance to motion. This resistance to fluid motion
is like an internal friction analogous to friction when
a solid moves on a surface. It is called  viscosity.
This force exists when there is relative motion
between layers of the liquid. Suppose we consider
a fluid  like oil  enclosed between two glass plates
as shown in Fig. 9.12 (a). The bottom plate is fixed
while the top plate is moved with a constant
velocity v relative to the fixed plate. If oil is
replaced by honey, a greater force is required to
move the plate with the same velocity. Hence
we say that honey is more viscous than oil. The
fluid in contact with a surface has the same
velocity as that of the surfaces. Hence, the layer
of the liquid in contact with top surface moves
with a velocity v and the layer of the liquid in
contact with the fixed surface is stationary. The
velocities of layers increase uniformly from
bottom (zero velocity) to the top layer (velocity
v). For any layer of liquid, its upper layer pulls
it forward while lower layer pulls it backward.
This results in force between the layers. This
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 12 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
191
⊳
change of strain’ or ‘strain rate’ i.e. ∆x/(l ∆t) or
v/l instead of strain itself. The coefficient of
viscosity (pronounced ‘eta’) for a fluid is defined
as the ratio of shearing stress to the strain rate.
(9.16)
The SI unit of viscosity is poiseiulle (Pl). Its
other units are N s m-2 or Pa s. The dimensions
of viscosity are [ML-1T-1]. Generally, thin liquids,
like water, alcohol, etc., are less viscous than
thick liquids, like coal tar, blood, glycerine, etc.
The coefficients of viscosity for some common
fluids are listed in Table 9.2. We point out two
facts about blood and water that you may find
interesting. As Table 9.2 indicates, blood is
‘thicker’ (more viscous) than water. Further, the
relative viscosity (η/ηwater) of blood remains
constant between 0 
oC and 37 
oC.
type of flow is known as laminar. The layers of
liquid slide over one another as the pages of a
book do when it is placed flat on a table and a
horizontal force is applied to the top cover. When
a fluid is flowing in a pipe or a tube, then  velocity
of the liquid layer along the axis of the tube is
maximum and  decreases  gradually as we move
towards the walls where it becomes zero,
Fig. 9.12 (b). The velocity on a cylindrical surface
in a tube is constant.
(a)
(b)
Fig 9.12 (a) A layer of liquid sandwiched between
two parallel glass plates, in which the
lower plate is fixed and the upper one is
moving to the right with velocity v
(b) velocity distribution for viscous flow in
a pipe.
On account of this motion, a portion of liquid,
which at some instant has the shape ABCD,
take the shape of AEFD after short interval of
time (∆t). During this time interval the liquid has
undergone a shear strain of ∆x/l. Since, the
strain in a flowing fluid increases with time
continuously. Unlike a solid, here the stress is
found experimentally to depend on ‘rate of
Fig. 9.13
Measurement of the coefficient of viscosity
of a liquid.
The viscosity of liquids decreases with
temperature, while it increases in the case of gases.
Example 9.8 A metal block of area 0.10 m2 is
connected to a 0.010 kg mass via a string
that passes over an ideal pulley (considered
massless and frictionless), as in Fig. 9.13.
A liquid with a film thickness of 0.30 mm
is placed between the block and the table.
When released the block moves to the right
with a constant speed of 0.085 m s-1. Find
the coefficient of viscosity of the liquid.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 13 :
 192
PHYSICS
⊳
Answer The metal block moves to the right
because of the tension in the string. The tension
T is equal in magnitude to the weight of the
suspended mass m. Thus, the shear force  F  is
F = T = mg = 0.010 kg × 9.8 m s–2 = 9.8 × 10-2 N
Shear stress on the fluid = F/A = 
N/m2
Strain rate = 
 
  = 
  = 3.46 ×10-3 Pa s
  ⊳
Table 9.2 The viscosities of some fluids
Fluid
T(oC)
Viscosity (mPl)
Water
20
1.0
100
0.3
Blood
37
2.7
Machine Oil
16
113
38
34
Glycerine
20
830
Honey
–
200
Air
0
0.017
40
0.019
9.5.1 Stokes’ Law
When a body falls through a fluid it drags the
layer of the fluid in contact with it. A relative
motion between the different layers of the fluid
is set and, as a result, the body experiences a
retarding force. Falling of a raindrop and
swinging of a pendulum bob are some common
examples of such motion. It is seen that the
viscous force is proportional to the velocity of
the object and is opposite to the direction of
motion. The other quantities on which the force
F depends are viscosity η of the fluid and radius
a of the sphere. Sir George G. Stokes (1819–
1903), an English scientist enunciated clearly
the viscous drag force F as
6
F
av
η
=
π
(9.17)
This is known as Stokes’ law. We shall not
derive Stokes’ law.
This law is an interesting example of retarding
force, which is proportional to velocity. We can
study its consequences on an object falling
through a viscous  medium. We consider a
raindrop in air. It accelerates initially due to
gravity. As the velocity increases, the retarding
force also increases. Finally, when viscous force
plus buoyant force becomes equal to the force
due to gravity, the net force becomes zero and so
does the acceleration. The sphere (raindrop) then
descends with a constant velocity. Thus, in
equilibrium, this terminal velocity vt is given by
6πηavt = (4π/3) a3 (ρ-σ)g
where ρ and σ are mass densities of sphere and
the fluid, respectively. We obtain
vt = 2a2 (ρ-σ)g / (9η)
(9.18)
So the terminal velocity vt depends on the
square of the radius of the sphere and inversely
on the viscosity of the medium.
You may like to refer back to Example 6.2 in
this context.
Example 9.9 The terminal velocity of a
copper ball of radius 2.0 mm falling through
a tank of oil at 20oC is 6.5 cm s-1. Compute
the viscosity of the oil at 20oC. Density of
oil is 1.5 ×103 kg m-3, density of copper is
8.9 × 103 kg m-3.
Answer We have vt = 6.5 × 10-2 ms-1, a = 2 × 10-3 m,
g = 9.8 ms-2,  ρ = 8.9 × 103 kg m-3,
σ =1.5 ×103 kg m-3. From Eq. (9.18)
   =  9.9 × 10-1 kg m–1 s–1
⊳
9.6  SURFACE TENSION
You must have noticed that, oil and water do
not mix; water wets you and me but not ducks;
mercury does not wet glass but water sticks to
it, oil rises up a cotton wick, inspite of gravity,
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 14 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
193
Fig. 9.14
Schematic picture of molecules in a liquid, at the surface and balance of forces. (a) Molecule inside
a liquid. Forces on a molecule due to others are shown. Direction of arrows indicates attraction of
repulsion. (b) Same, for a molecule at a surface. (c) Balance of attractive (AI and repulsive (R) forces.
Let us consider a molecule near the surface
Fig. 9.14(b). Only lower half side of it is
surrounded by liquid molecules. There is some
negative potential energy due to these, but
obviously it is less than that of a molecule in
bulk, i.e., the one fully inside. Approximately
it is half of the latter. Thus, molecules on a
liquid surface have some extra energy in
comparison to molecules in the interior. A
liquid, thus, tends to have the least surface
area which external conditions permit.
Increasing surface area requires energy. Most
surface phenomenon can be understood in
terms of this fact. What is the energy required
for having a molecule at the surface? As
mentioned above, roughly it is half the energy
required to remove it entirely from the liquid
i.e., half the heat of evaporation.
Finally, what is a surface? Since a liquid
consists of molecules moving about, there cannot
be a perfectly sharp surface. The density of the
liquid molecules drops rapidly to zero around
z = 0 as we move along the direction indicated
Fig 9.14 (c) in a distance of the order of a few
molecular sizes.
9.6.2 Surface Energy and Surface Tension
As we have discussed that an extra energy is
associated with surface of liquids, the creation
of more surface (spreading of surface) keeping
other things like volume fixed requires a
Sap and water rise up to the top of the leaves of
the tree, hair of a paint brush do not cling
together when dry and even when dipped in
water but form a fine tip when taken out of it.
All these and many more such experiences are
related with the free surfaces of liquids. As
liquids have no definite shape but have a
definite volume, they acquire a free surface when
poured in a container. These surfaces  possess
some additional  energy. This phenomenon is
known as surface tension and it is concerned
with only liquid as gases do not have free
surfaces. Let us now understand this
phenomena.
9.6.1 Surface Energy
A liquid stays together because of attraction
between molecules. Consider a molecule well
inside a liquid. The intermolecular distances are
such that it is attracted to all the surrounding
molecules [Fig. 9.14(a)]. This attraction results
in a negative potential energy for the molecule,
which depends on the number and distribution
of molecules around the chosen one. But the
average potential energy of all the molecules is
the same. This is supported by the fact that to
take a collection of such molecules (the liquid)
and to disperse them far away from each other
in order to evaporate or vaporise, the heat of
evaporation required is quite large. For water it
is of the order of 40 kJ/mol.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 15 :
 194
PHYSICS
horizontal liquid film ending in bar free to slide
over parallel guides Fig (9.15).
Fig. 9.15 Stretching a film. (a) A film in equilibrium;
(b) The film stretched an extra distance.
Suppose that we move the bar by a small
distance d as shown. Since the area of the
surface increases, the system now has more
energy, this means that some work has been
done against an internal force. Let this internal
force be F, the work done by the applied force is
F.d = Fd. From conservation of energy, this is
stored as additional energy in the film. If the
surface energy of the film is S per unit area, the
extra area is 2dl. A film has two sides and the
liquid in between, so there are two surfaces and
the extra energy is
S (2dl) = Fd
(9.19)
Or, S=Fd/2dl = F/2l
(9.20)
This quantity S is the magnitude of surface
tension. It is equal to the surface energy per unit
area of the liquid interface and is also equal to
the force per unit length exerted by the fluid on
the movable bar.
So far we have talked about the surface of
one liquid. More generally, we need to consider
fluid surface in contact with other fluids or solid
surfaces. The surface energy in that case
depends on the materials on both sides of the
surface. For example, if the molecules of the
materials attract each other, surface energy is
reduced while if they repel each other the
surface energy is increased. Thus, more
appropriately, the surface energy is the energy
of the interface between two materials and
depends on both of them.
We make the following observations from
above:
(i)
Surface tension is a force per unit length
(or surface energy per unit area) acting in
the plane of the interface between the plane
of the liquid and any other substance; it also
is the extra energy that the molecules at the
interface have as compared to molecules in
the interior.
(ii) At any point on the interface besides the
boundary, we can draw a line and imagine
equal and opposite surface tension forces
S per unit length of the line acting
perpendicular to the line, in the plane of
the interface. The line is in equilibrium. To
be more specific, imagine a line of atoms or
molecules at the surface. The atoms to the
left pull the line towards them; those to the
right pull it towards them! This line of
atoms is in equilibrium under tension. If
the line really marks the end of the
interface, as in Figure 9.14 (a) and (b) there
is only the force S per unit length
acting inwards.
Table 9.3 gives the surface tension of various
liquids. The value of surface tension depends
on temperature. Like viscosity, the surface
tension of a liquid usually falls with
temperature.
Table 9.3
Surface tension of some liquids at the
temperatures indicated with the
heats of the vaporisation
Liquid
Temp (oC)
Surface
Heat of
Tension
vaporisation
 (N/m)
 (kJ/mol)
Helium
–270
0.000239
0.115
Oxygen
–183
0.0132
7.1
Ethanol
20
0.0227
40.6
Water
20
0.0727
44.16
Mercury
20
0.4355
63.2
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 16 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
195
A fluid will stick to a solid surface if the
surface energy between fluid and the solid is
smaller than the sum of surface energies
between solid-air, and fluid-air. Now there is
attraction between the solid surface and the
liquid. It can be directly measured
experimentaly as schematically shown in Fig.
9.16. A flat vertical glass plate, below which a
vessel of some liquid is kept, forms one arm of
the balance. The plate is balanced by weights
on the other side, with its horizontal edge just
over water. The vessel is raised slightly till the
liquid just touches the glass plate and pulls it
down a little because of surface tension. Weights
are added till the plate just clears water.
Fig. 9.16 Measuring Surface Tension.
Suppose the additional weight required is W.
Then from Eq. 9.20 and the discussion given
there, the surface tension of the liquid-air
interface is
Sla = (W/2l) = (mg/2l )
(9.21)
where m is the extra mass and l is the length of
the plate edge. The subscript (la) emphasises
the fact that the liquid-air interface tension
is involved.
9.6.3 Angle of Contact
The surface of liquid near the plane of contact,
with another medium is in general curved. The
angle between tangent to the liquid surface at
the point of contact and solid surface inside the
liquid is termed as angle of contact. It is denoted
by θ. It is different at interfaces of different pairs
of liquids and solids. The value of θ determines
whether a liquid will spread on the surface of a
solid or it will form droplets on it. For example,
water forms droplets on lotus leaf as shown in
Fig. 9.17 (a) while spreads over a clean plastic
plate as shown in Fig. 9.17(b).
(a)
(b)
Fig. 9.17
Different shapes of water drops with
interfacial tensions (a) on a lotus leaf (b)
on a clean plastic plate.
We consider the three interfacial tensions at
all the three interfaces, liquid-air, solid-air and
solid-liquid denoted by Sla, Ssa and Ssl , respectively
as given in Fig. 9.17 (a) and (b). At the line of
contact, the surface forces between the three media
must be in equilibrium. From the Fig. 9.17(b) the
following relation is easily derived.
Sla cos θ  +  Ssl =  Ssa
(9.22)
The angle of contact is an obtuse angle if
Ssl  > Sla as in the case of water-leaf interface
while it is an acute angle if Ssl  < Sla as in the
case of water-plastic interface. When θ is an
obtuse angle then molecules of liquids are
attracted strongly to themselves and weakly to
those of solid, it costs a lot of energy to create a
liquid-solid surface, and liquid then does not
wet the solid. This is what happens with water
on a waxy or oily surface, and with mercury on
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 17 :
 196
PHYSICS
any surface. On the other hand, if the molecules
of the liquid are strongly attracted to those of
the solid, this will reduce Ssl and therefore,
cos θ may increase or θ may decrease. In this
case θ is an acute angle. This is what happens
for water on glass or on plastic and for kerosene
oil on virtually anything (it just spreads). Soaps,
detergents and dying substances are wetting
agents. When they are added the angle of
contact becomes small so that these may
penetrate well and become effective. Water
proofing agents on the other hand are added to
create a large angle of contact between the water
and fibres.
9.6.4 Drops and Bubbles
One consequence of surface tension is that free
liquid drops and bubbles are spherical if effects
of gravity can be neglected. You must have seen
this especially clearly in small drops just formed
in a high-speed spray or jet, and in soap bubbles
blown by most of us in childhood. Why are drops
and bubbles spherical? What keeps soap
bubbles stable?
As we have been saying repeatedly, a liquid-
air interface has energy, so for a given volume
the surface with minimum energy is the one with
the least area. The sphere has this property.
Though it is out of the scope of this book, but
you can check that a sphere is better than at
least a cube in this respect! So, if gravity and
other forces (e.g. air resistance) were ineffective,
liquid drops would be spherical.
Another interesting consequence of surface
tension is that the pressure inside a spherical
drop Fig. 9.18(a) is more than the pressure
outside. Suppose a spherical drop of radius r is
in equilibrium. If its radius increase by ∆r. The
extra surface energy is
[4π(r + ∆r) 2- 4πr2] Sla = 8πr ∆r Sla
(9.23)
If the drop is in equilibrium this energy cost is
balanced by the energy gain due to
expansion under the pressure difference (Pi – Po)
between the inside of the bubble and the outside.
The work done is
W = (Pi – Po) 4πr2∆r
(9.24)
so that
(Pi – Po) = (2 Sla/ r)
(9.25)
In general, for a liquid-gas interface, the
convex side has a higher pressure than the
concave side. For example, an air bubble in a
liquid, would have higher pressure inside it.
See Fig 9.18 (b).
Fig. 9.18 Drop, cavity and bubble of radius r.
A bubble Fig 9.18 (c) differs from a drop
and a cavity; in this it has two interfaces. Applying
the above argument we have for a bubble
 (Pi – Po) = (4 Sla/ r)
(9.26)
This is probably why you have to blow hard,
but not too hard, to form a soap bubble. A little
extra air pressure is needed inside!
9.6.5 Capillary Rise
One consequence of the pressure difference
across a curved liquid-air interface is the well-
known effect that water rises up in a narrow
tube in spite of gravity. The word capilla means
hair in Latin; if the tube were hair thin, the rise
would be very large. To see this, consider a
vertical capillary tube of circular cross section
(radius a) inserted into an open vessel of water
(Fig. 9.19). The contact angle between water and
Fig. 9.19
Capillary rise, (a) Schematic picture of a
narrow tube immersed water.
(b) Enlarged picture near interface.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 18 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
197
⊳
glass is acute. Thus the surface of water in the
capillary is concave. This means that there is
a pressure difference between the two sides
of the top surface. This is given by
(Pi – Po) =(2S/r) = 2S/(a sec θ )
= (2S/a) cos θ
(9.27)
Thus the pressure of the water inside the
tube, just at the meniscus (air-water interface)
is less than the atmospheric pressure. Consider
the two points A and B in Fig. 9.19(a). They
must be at the same pressure, namely
P0 + h ρ g = Pi = PA
(9.28)
where ρρρρρ is the density of water and h is called
the capillary rise [Fig. 9.19(a)]. Using
Eq. (9.27) and (9.28) we have
h ρ g = (Pi – P0) = (2S cos θ )/a
   (9.29)
The discussion here, and the Eqs. (9.24) and
(9.25) make it clear that the capillary rise is due
to surface tension. It is larger, for a smaller a.
Typically it is of the order of a few cm for fine
capillaries. For example, if a = 0.05 cm, using
the value of surface tension for water (Table 9.3),
we find that
h = 2S/(ρ g a)
  
-1
3
-3
-2
-4
2×(0.073 N m )
= (10 kg m ) (9.8 m s )(5 × 10
m)
  = 2.98 × 10–2 m = 2.98 cm
Notice that if the liquid meniscus is convex,
as for mercury, i.e., if cos θ is negative then from
Eq. (9.28) for example, it is clear that the liquid
will be lower in the capillary !
Example 9.10 The lower end of a capillary
tube of diameter 2.00 mm is dipped 8.00
cm below the surface of water in a beaker.
What is the pressure required in the tube
in order to blow a hemispherical bubble at
its end in water? The surface tension of
water at temperature of the experiments is
7.30 × 10-2 Nm-1. 1 atmospheric pressure =
1.01 × 105 Pa, density of water = 1000 kg/m3,
g = 9.80 m s-2. Also calculate the excess
pressure.
Answer The excess pressure in a bubble of gas
in a liquid is given by 2S/r, where S is the
surface tension of the liquid-gas interface. You
should note there is only one liquid surface in
this case. (For a bubble of liquid in a gas, there
are two liquid surfaces, so the formula for
excess pressure in that case is 4S/r.) The
radius of the bubble is r. Now the pressure
outside the bubble Po equals atmospheric
pressure plus the pressure due to 8.00 cm of
water column. That is
Po = (1.01 × 105 Pa + 0.08 m × 1000 kg m–3
    × 9.80 m s–2)
    = 1.01784 × 105 Pa
Therefore, the pressure inside the bubble is
  Pi  = Po + 2S/r
= 1.01784 × 105 Pa + (2 × 7.3 × 10-2 Pa m/10-3 m)
= (1.01784 + 0.00146) × 105  Pa
= 1.02  × 105 Pa
where the radius of the bubble is taken
to be equal to the radius of the capillary tube,
since the bubble is hemispherical ! (The answer
has been rounded off to three significant figures.)
The excess pressure in the bubble is 146 Pa.
⊳
SUMMARY
1.
The basic property of a fluid is that it can flow. The fluid does not have any
resistance to change of its shape. Thus, the shape of a fluid is governed by the
shape of its container.
2.
A liquid is incompressible and has a free surface of its own. A gas is compressible
and it expands to occupy all the space available to it.
3.
If F is the normal force exerted by a fluid on an area A then the average pressure Pav
is defined as the ratio of the force to area
A
F
Pav =
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 19 :
 198
PHYSICS
4.
The unit of the pressure is the pascal (Pa). It is the same as N m-2. Other common
units of pressure are
1 atm = 1.01×105 Pa
1 bar = 105 Pa
1 torr = 133 Pa = 0.133 kPa
1 mm of Hg = 1 torr = 133 Pa
5.
Pascal’s law states that: Pressure in a fluid at rest is same at all points which are at
the same height. A change in pressure applied to an enclosed fluid is transmitted
undiminished to every point of the fluid and the walls of the containing vessel.
6.
The pressure in a fluid varies with depth h according to the expression
P = Pa + ρgh
where  ρ is the density of the fluid, assumed uniform.
7.
The volume of an incompressible fluid passing any point every second in a pipe of
non uniform crossection is the same in the steady flow.
v A = constant ( v is the velocity and A is the area of crossection)
The equation is due to mass conservation in incompressible fluid flow.
8.
Bernoulli’s principle states that as we move along a streamline, the sum of the
pressure (P), the kinetic energy per unit volume (ρv2/2) and the potential energy per
unit volume (ρgy) remains a constant.
P + ρv2/2 + ρgy = constant
The equation is basically the conservation of energy applied to non viscuss fluid
motion in steady state. There is no fluid which have zero viscosity, so the above
statement is true only approximately. The viscosity is like friction and converts the
kinetic energy to heat energy.
9.
Though shear strain in a fluid does not require shear stress, when a shear stress is
applied to a fluid, the motion is generated which causes a shear strain growing
with time. The ratio of the shear stress to the time rate of shearing strain is known
as coefficient of viscosity, η.
where symbols have their usual meaning and are defined in the text.
10.
Stokes’ law states that the viscous drag force F on a sphere of radius a moving with
velocity v through a fluid of viscosity is, F = 6πηav.
11.
Surface tension is a force per unit length (or surface energy per unit area) acting in
the plane of interface between the liquid and the bounding surface. It is the extra
energy that the molecules at the interface have as compared to the interior.
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
Pressure is a scalar quantity. The definition of the pressure as “force per unit area”
may give one false impression that pressure is a vector. The “force” in the numerator of
the definition is the component of the force normal to the area upon which it is
impressed. While describing fluids as a concept, shift from particle and rigid body
mechanics is required. We are concerned with properties that vary from point to point
in the fluid.
2.
 One should not think of pressure of a fluid as being exerted only on a solid like the
walls of a container or a piece of solid matter immersed in the fluid. Pressure exists at
all points in a fluid. An element of a fluid (such as the one shown in Fig. 9.4) is in
equilibrium because the pressures exerted on the various faces are equal.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 20 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
199
3.
The expression for pressure
P = Pa + ρgh
holds true if fluid is incompressible. Practically speaking it holds for liquids, which
are largely incompressible and hence  is a constant with height.
4.
The gauge pressure is the difference of the actual pressure and the atmospheric pressure.
P – Pa = Pg
Many pressure-measuring devices measure the gauge pressure. These include the tyre
pressure gauge and the blood pressure gauge (sphygmomanometer).
5.
A streamline is a map of fluid flow. In a steady flow two streamlines do not intersect as
it means that the fluid particle will have two possible velocities at the point.
6.
Bernoulli’s principle does not hold in presence of viscous drag on the fluid. The work
done by this dissipative viscous force must be taken into account in this case, and P2
[Fig. 9.9] will be lower than the value given by Eq. (9.12).
7.
As the temperature rises the atoms of the liquid become more mobile and the coefficient
of viscosity, η  falls. In a gas the temperature rise increases the random motion of
atoms and η  increases.
8.
Surface tension arises due to excess potential energy of the molecules on the surface
in comparison to their potential energy in the interior. Such a surface energy is present
at the interface separating two substances at least one of which is a fluid. It is not the
property of a single fluid alone.
EXERCISES
9.1
Explain why
(a)
The blood pressure in humans is greater at the feet than at the brain
(b)
Atmospheric pressure at a height of about 6 km decreases to nearly half of
its value at the sea level, though the height of the atmosphere is more than
100 km
(c)
Hydrostatic pressure is a scalar quantity even though pressure is force
divided by area.
9.2
Explain why
(a)
The angle of contact of mercury with glass is obtuse, while that of water
with glass is acute.
(b)
Water on a clean glass surface tends to spread out while mercury on the
same surface tends to form drops. (Put differently, water wets glass while
mercury does not.)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 21 :
 200
PHYSICS
(c)
Surface tension of a liquid is independent of the area of the surface
(d)
Water with detergent disolved in it should have small angles of contact.
(e)
A drop of liquid under no external forces is always spherical in shape
9.3
Fill in the blanks using the word(s) from the list appended with each statement:
(a)
Surface tension of liquids generally ... with temperatures (increases / decreases)
(b)
Viscosity of gases ... with temperature, whereas viscosity of   liquids  ...  with
temperature (increases / decreases)
(c)
For solids with elastic modulus of rigidity, the shearing force is proportional
to ... , while for fluids it is proportional to ... (shear strain / rate of shear
strain)
(d)
For a fluid in a steady flow, the increase in flow speed at a constriction follows
(conservation of mass / Bernoulli’s principle)
(e)
For the model of  a plane in a wind tunnel, turbulence occurs at a ... speed for
turbulence for an actual plane (greater / smaller)
9.4
Explain why
(a)
To keep a piece of paper horizontal, you should blow over, not under, it
(b)
When we try to close a water tap with our fingers, fast jets of water gush
through the openings between our fingers
(c)
The size of the needle of a syringe controls flow rate better than the thumb
pressure exerted by a doctor while administering an injection
(d)
A fluid flowing out of a small hole in a vessel results in a backward thrust on
the vessel
(e)
A spinning cricket ball in air does not follow a parabolic trajectory
9.5
A 50 kg girl wearing high heel shoes balances on a single heel. The heel is circular with
a diameter 1.0 cm. What is the pressure exerted by the heel on the horizontal floor ?
9.6
Toricelli’s barometer used mercury. Pascal duplicated it using French wine of density
984 kg m–3. Determine the height of the wine column for normal atmospheric
pressure.
9.7
A vertical off-shore structure is built to withstand a maximum stress of 109 Pa. Is
the structure suitable for putting up on top of an oil well in the ocean ? Take the
depth of the ocean to be roughly 3 km, and ignore ocean currents.
9.8
A hydraulic automobile lift is designed to lift cars with a maximum mass of 3000
kg. The area of cross-section of the piston carrying the load is 425 cm2. What
maximum pressure would the smaller piston have to bear ?
9.9
A U-tube contains water and methylated spirit separated by mercury. The mercury
columns in the two arms are in level with 10.0 cm of water in one arm and 12.5 cm
of spirit in the other. What is the specific gravity of spirit ?
9.10
In the previous problem, if 15.0 cm of water and spirit each are further poured into
the respective arms of the tube, what is the difference in the levels of mercury in the
two arms ? (Specific gravity of mercury = 13.6)
9.11
Can Bernoulli’s equation be used to describe the flow of water through a rapid in a
river ? Explain.
9.12
Does it matter if one uses gauge instead of absolute pressures in applying Bernoulli’s
equation ? Explain.
9.13
Glycerine flows steadily through a horizontal tube of length 1.5 m and radius 1.0
cm. If the amount of glycerine collected per second at one end is 4.0 × 10–3 kg s–1,
what is the pressure difference between the two ends of the tube ? (Density of glycerine
= 1.3 × 103 kg m–3 and viscosity of glycerine = 0.83 Pa s). [You may also like to check
if the assumption of laminar flow in the tube is correct].
9.14
In a test experiment on a model aeroplane in a wind tunnel, the flow speeds on the
upper and lower surfaces of the wing are 70 m s–1and 63 m s-1 respectively. What is
the lift on the wing if its area is 2.5 m2  ? Take the density of air to be 1.3 kg m–3.
9.15
Figures 9.20(a) and (b) refer to the steady flow of a (non-viscous) liquid. Which of
the two figures is incorrect ? Why ?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 02 - Page 22 :
 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS
201
Fig. 9.20
9.16
The cylindrical tube of a spray pump has a cross-section of 8.0 cm2 one end of
which has 40 fine holes each of diameter 1.0 mm. If the liquid flow inside the tube
is 1.5 m min–1, what is the speed of ejection of the liquid through the holes ?
9.17
A U-shaped wire is dipped in a soap solution, and removed. The thin soap film
formed between the wire and the light slider supports a weight of 1.5 × 10–2 N (which
includes the small weight of the slider). The length of the slider is 30 cm. What is
the surface tension of the film ?
9.18
Figure 9.21 (a) shows a thin liquid film supporting a small weight = 4.5 × 10–2 N.
What is the weight supported by a film of the same liquid at the same temperature
in Fig. (b) and (c) ? Explain your answer physically.
Fig. 9.21
9.19
What is the pressure inside the drop of mercury of radius 3.00 mm at room temperature ?
Surface  tension of mercury  at that temperature  (20 °C) is 4.65 × 10–1 N m–1. The
atmospheric pressure is 1.01 × 105 Pa. Also give the excess pressure inside the drop.
9.20
What is the excess pressure inside a bubble of soap solution of radius 5.00 mm,
given that the surface tension of soap solution at the temperature (20 °C) is 2.50 ×
10–2 N m–1 ? If an air bubble of the same dimension were formed at depth of 40.0 cm
inside a container containing the soap solution (of relative density 1.20), what would
be the pressure inside the bubble ? (1 atmospheric pressure is  1.01 × 105 Pa).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 1 :
 CHAPTER TEN
THERMAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
10.1  INTRODUCTION
We all have common sense notions of heat and temperature.
Temperature is a measure of ‘hotness’ of a body. A kettle
with boiling water is hotter than a box containing ice. In
physics, we need to define the notion of heat, temperature,
etc., more carefully. In this chapter, you will learn what heat
is and how it is measured, and study the various proceses by
which heat flows from one body to another. Along the way,
you will find out why blacksmiths heat the iron ring before
fitting on the rim of a wooden wheel of a horse cart and why
the wind at the beach often reverses direction after the sun
goes down. You will also learn what happens when water boils
or freezes, and its temperature does not change during these
processes even though a great deal of heat is flowing into or
out of it.
10.2  TEMPERATURE AND HEAT
We can begin studying thermal properties of matter with
definitions of temperature and heat. Temperature is a relative
measure, or indication of hotness or coldness. A hot utensil
is said to have a high temperature, and ice cube to have a
low temperature. An object that has a higher temperature
than another object is said to be hotter. Note that hot and
cold are relative terms, like tall and short. We can perceive
temperature by touch. However, this temperature sense is
somewhat unreliable and its range is too limited to be useful
for scientific purposes.
We know from experience that a glass of ice-cold water left
on a table on a hot summer day eventually warms up whereas
a cup of hot tea on the same table cools down. It means that
when the temperature of body, ice-cold water or hot tea in
this case, and its surrounding medium are different, heat
transfer takes place between the system and the surrounding
medium, until the body and the surrounding medium are at
the same temperature. We also know that in the case of glass
tumbler of ice-cold water, heat flows from the environment to
10.1
Introduction
10.2
Temperature and heat
10.3
Measurement of
temperature
10.4
Ideal-gas equation and
absolute temperature
10.5
Thermal expansion
10.6
Specific heat capacity
10.7
Calorimetry
10.8
Change of state
10.9
Heat transfer
10.10 Newton’s law of cooling
Summary
Points to ponder
Exercises
Additional Exercises
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 2 :
 the glass tumbler, whereas in the case of hot
tea, it flows from the cup of hot tea to the
environment. So, we can say that heat is the
form of energy transferred between two (or
more) systems or a system and its
surroundings by virtue of temperature
difference. The SI unit of heat energy
transferred is expressed in joule (J) while SI unit
of temperature is Kelvin (K), and degree Celsius
(
oC) is a commonly used unit of temperature.
When an object is heated, many changes may
take place. Its temperature may rise, it may
expand or change state. We will study the effect
of heat on different bodies in later sections.
10.3  MEASUREMENT OF TEMPERATURE
A measure of temperature is obtained using a
thermometer. Many physical properties of
materials change sufficiently with temperature.
Some such properties are used as the basis for
constructing thermometers. The commonly used
property is variation of the volume of a liquid
with temperature. For example, in common
liquid–in–glass thermometers,  mercury, alcohol
etc., are used whose volume varies linearly with
temperature over a wide range.
    Thermometers are calibrated so that a
numerical value may be assigned to a given
temperature in an appropriate scale. For the
definition of any standard scale, two fixed
reference points are needed. Since all
substances 
change 
dimensions 
with
temperature, an absolute reference for
expansion is not available. However, the
necessary fixed points may be correlated to the
physical phenomena that always occur at the
same temperature. The ice point and the steam
point of water are two convenient fixed points
and are known as the freezing and boiling
points, respectively. These two points are the
temperatures at which pure water freezes and
boils under standard pressure. The two familiar
temperature scales are the Fahrenheit
temperature scale and the Celsius temperature
scale. The ice and steam point have values
32 °F and 212 °F, respectively, on the Fahrenheit
scale and 0 °C and 100 °C on the Celsius scale.
On the Fahrenheit scale, there are 180 equal
intervals between two reference points, and on
the Celsius scale, there are 100.
Fig. 10.1 A plot of Fahrenheit temperature (tF) versus
Celsius temperature (tc).
 A relationship for converting between the two
scales may be obtained from a graph of
Fahrenheit temperature (tF) versus celsius
temperature (tC) in a straight line (Fig. 10.1),
whose equation is
t
t
F
C
– 32
180
100
=
(10.1)
10.4 IDEAL-GAS EQUATION AND
ABSOLUTE TEMPERATURE
Liquid-in-glass thermometers show different
readings for temperatures other than the fixed
points because of differing expansion properties.
A thermometer that uses a gas, however, gives
the same readings regardless of which gas is
used. Experiments show that all gases at low
densities exhibit same expansion behaviour. The
variables that describe the behaviour of a given
quantity (mass) of gas are pressure, volume, and
temperature (P, V, and T )(where T = t + 273.15;
t is the temperature in °C). When temperature
is held constant, the pressure and volume of a
quantity of gas are related as  PV = constant.
This relationship is known as Boyle’s law, after
Robert Boyle (1627–1691), the English Chemist
who discovered it. When the pressure is held
constant, the volume of a quantity of the gas is
related to the temperature as V/T = constant.
This relationship is known as Charles’ law,
after  French scientist Jacques Charles (1747–
1823). Low-density gases obey these
laws, which may be combined into a single
THERMAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
203
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 3 :
 204
PHYSICS
named after the British scientist Lord Kelvin. On
this scale, – 273.15 °C is taken as the zero point,
that is 0 K (Fig. 10.4).
The size of unit in Kelvin and Celsius
temperature scales is the same.  So, temperature
on these scales are related by
T = tC + 273.15
(10.3)
10.5  THERMAL EXPANSION
You may have observed that sometimes sealed
bottles with metallic lids are so tightly screwed
that one has to put the lid in hot water for some
time to open it. This would allow the metallic lid
to expand, thereby loosening it to unscrew
easily. In case of liquids, you may have observed
that mercury in a thermometer rises, when the
thermometer is put in slightly warm water. If
we take out the thermometer from the warm
Fig. 10.2 Pressure versus temperature of a low
density gas kept at constant volume.
Fig. 10.3 A plot of pressure versus temperature and
extrapolation of lines for low density gases
indicates the same absolute zero
temperature.
Fig. 10.4 Comparision of the Kelvin, Celsius and
Fahrenheit temperature scales.
relationship. Notice that since PV = constant
and V/T = constant for a given quantity of gas,
then PV/T should also be a constant. This
relationship is known as ideal gas law. It can be
written in a more general form that applies not
just to a given quantity of a single gas but to any
quantity of any low-density gas and is known as
ideal-gas equation:
or PV = µRT
(10.2)
where, µ is the number of moles in the sample of
gas and R is called universal gas constant:
R = 8.31 J mol–1 K–1
In Eq. 10.2, we have learnt that the pressure
and volume are directly proportional to
temperature : PV ∝ T. This relationship allows a
gas to be used to measure temperature in a
constant volume gas thermometer. Holding the
volume of a gas constant, it gives P ∝T. Thus,
with a constant-volume gas thermometer,
temperature is read in terms of pressure. A plot
of pressure versus temperature gives a straight
line in this case, as shown in Fig. 10.2.
However, measurements on real gases deviate
from the values predicted by the ideal gas law
at low temperature. But the relationship is linear
over a large temperature range, and it looks as
though the pressure might reach zero with
decreasing temperature if the gas continued to
be a gas. The absolute minimum temperature
for an ideal gas, therefore, inferred by
extrapolating the straight line to the axis, as in
Fig. 10.3.  This temperature is found to be
– 273.15 °C and is designated as absolute zero.
Absolute zero is the foundation of the Kelvin
temperature scale or absolute scale temperature
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 4 :
 THERMAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
205
water the level of mercury falls again. Similarly,
in case of gases, a balloon partially inflated in a
cool room may expand to full size when placed
in warm water. On the other hand, a fully
inflated balloon when immersed in cold water
would start shrinking due to contraction of the
air inside.
It is our common experience that most
substances expand on heating and contract on
cooling. A change in the temperature of a body
causes change in its dimensions. The increase
in the dimensions of a body due to the increase
in its temperature is called thermal expansion.
The expansion in length is called linear
expansion. The expansion in area is called area
expansion. The expansion in volume is called
volume expansion (Fig. 10.5).
Fig. 10.5  Thermal Expansion.
If the substance is in the form of a long rod,
then for small change in temperature, ∆T, the
fractional change in length, ∆l/l, is directly
proportional to ∆T.
(10.4)
where α1 is known as the coefficient of linear
expansion (or linear expansivity) and is
characteristic of the material of the rod. In Table
10.1, typical average values of the coefficient of
linear expansion for some material in the
temperature range 0 °C to 100 °C are given. From
this Table, compare the value of αl for glass and
copper. We find that copper expands about five
times more than glass for the same rise in
temperature. Normally, metals expand more and
have relatively high values of αl.
Table 10.1 Values of coefficient of linear
expansion for some material
Material
ααααα l (10–5 K–1)
Aluminium
2.5
Brass
1.8
Iron
1.2
Copper
1.7
Silver
1.9
Gold
1.4
Glass (pyrex)
0.32
Lead
0.29
Similarly, we consider the fractional change
in volume, ∆V
V , of a substance for temperature
change ∆T and define the coefficient of volume
expansion (or volume expansivity), 
  as
(10.5)
Here αV is also a characteristic of the
substance but is not strictly a constant. It
depends in general on temperature (Fig 10.6). It
is seen that αV becomes constant only at a high
temperature.
Fig. 10.6 Coefficient of volume expansion of copper
as a function of temperature.
Table 10.2 gives the values of coefficient of
volume expansion of some common substances
in the temperature range 0–100 °C. You can see
that thermal expansion of these substances
(solids and liquids) is rather small, with material,
l
l
a
T
l
∆
=
∆
l
2
A
a
T
A
∆
=
∆
l
3
V
a
T
V
∆
=
∆
(a) Linear expansion
(b) Area expansion
(c) Volume expansion
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 5 :
 206
PHYSICS
like pyrex glass and invar (a special iron-nickel
alloy) having particularly low values of αV. From
this Table we find that the value of αv for
alcohol (ethanol) is more than mercury and
expands more than mercury for the same rise
in temperature.
Table 10.2
Values of coefficient of volume
expansion for some substances
Material
αααααv ( K–1)
Aluminium
7 × 10–5
Brass
6 × 10–5
Iron
3.55 × 10–5
Paraffin
58.8 × 10–5
Glass (ordinary)
2.5 × 10–5
Glass (pyrex)
1 × 10–5
Hard rubber
2.4 × 10–4
Invar
2 × 10–6
Mercury
18.2 × 10–5
Water
20.7 × 10–5
Alcohol (ethanol)
110 × 10–5
Water exhibits an anomalous behaviour; it
contracts on heating between 0 °C and 4 °C. The
volume of a given amount of water decreases as
it is cooled from room temperature, until its
temperature reaches 4 °C, [Fig. 10.7(a)]. Below
4 °C, the volume increases, and therefore, the
density decreases [Fig. 10.7(b)].
This means that water has the maximum
density at 4 °C. This property has an important
environmental effect: bodies of water, such as
lakes and ponds, freeze at the top first. As a lake
cools toward 4 °C, water near the surface loses
energy to the atmosphere, becomes denser, and
sinks; the warmer, less dense water near the
bottom rises. However, once the colder water on
top reaches temperature below 4 °C, it becomes
less dense and remains at the surface, where it
freezes. If water did not have this property, lakes
and ponds would freeze from the bottom up,
which would destroy much of their animal and
plant life.
Gases, at ordinary temperature, expand more
than solids and liquids. For liquids, the
coefficient of volume expansion is relatively
independent of the temperature. However, for
gases it is dependent on temperature. For an
ideal gas, the coefficient of volume expansion at
constant pressure can be found from the ideal
gas equation:
PV = µRT
At constant pressure
P∆V = µR ∆T
∆
∆
V
V
T
T
=
i.e., αv
T
= 1  for ideal gas
(10.6)
At 0 °C, αv = 3.7 × 10–3 K–1, which is much
larger than that for solids and liquids.
Equation (10.6) shows the temperature
dependence of αv; it decreases with increasing
temperature. For a gas at room temperature and
constant pressure, αv is about 3300 × 10–6 K–1, as
Temperature (°C)
Temperature (°C)
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10.7
Thermal expansion of water.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 6 :
 THERMAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
207
⊳
⊳
much as order(s) of magnitude larger than the
coefficient of volume expansion of typical liquids.
There is a simple relation between the
coefficient of volume expansion (αv) and
coefficient of linear expansion (αl). Imagine a
cube of length, l, that expands equally in all
directions, when its temperature increases by
∆T. We have
∆l = αl l ∆T
so, ∆V = (l+∆l)3 – l3 ≃ 3l2 ∆l
(10.7)
In Equation (10.7), terms in (∆l)2 and (∆l)3 have
been neglected since ∆l is small compared to l.
So
∆
∆
∆
V
V
l
l
V
T
l
=
=
3
3 α
(10.8)
which gives
αv = 3αl
(10.9)
What happens by preventing the thermal
expansion of a rod by fixing its ends rigidly?
Clearly, the rod acquires a compressive strain
due to the external forces provided by the rigid
support at the ends. The corresponding stress
set up in the rod is called thermal stress. For
example, consider a steel rail of length 5 m and
area of cross-section 40 cm2 that is prevented
from expanding while the temperature rises by
10 °C. The coefficient of linear expansion of steel
is αl(steel) = 1.2 × 10–5  K–1. Thus, the compressive
strain is ∆l
l = αl(steel) ∆T = 1.2 × 10–5 × 10=1.2 × 10–4.
Youngs modulus of steel is Y (steel) = 2 × 1011 N m–2.
Therefore, the thermal stress developed is
∆
∆
F
A
Y
l
l
steel
=



= 2.4 × 107 N m –2, which
corresponds to an external force of
∆F = AYsteel 
∆l
l



 =  2.4 × 107 × 40 × 10–4 j 105N. If
two such steel rails, fixed at their outer ends,
are in contact at their inner ends, a force of this
magnitude can easily bend the rails.
Example 10.1 Show that the coefficient of
area expansion, (∆A/A)/∆T, of a
rectangular sheet of the solid is twice its
linear expansivity, αl.
Answer
Fig. 10.8
Consider a rectangular sheet of the solid
material of length a and breadth b (Fig. 10.8 ).
When the temperature increases by ∆T, a
increases by  ∆a = αl a∆T and b increases by ∆b
= αlb ∆T. From Fig. 10.8,  the increase in area
∆A = ∆A1 +∆A2 + ∆A3
∆A = a ∆b + b ∆a + (∆a)  (∆b)
= a αlb ∆T + b αl a ∆T + (αl)2 ab (∆T)2
= αl ab ∆T (2 + αl ∆T) = αl A ∆T (2 + αl ∆T)
Since αl ≃ 10–5 K–1, from Table 10.1, the
product αl ∆T for fractional temperature is small
in comparision with 2 and may be neglected.
Hence,
⊳
Example 10.2 A blacksmith fixes iron ring
on the rim of the wooden wheel of a horse
cart. The diameter of the rim and the iron
ring are 5.243 m and 5.231 m, respectively
at 27 °C. To what temperature should the
ring be heated so as to fit the rim of the
wheel?
Answer
Given,
T1 = 27 °C
LT1 = 5.231 m
LT2 = 5.243 m
So,
LT2 =LT1 [1+αl (T2–T1)]
5.243 m = 5.231 m [1 + 1.20×10–5  K–1 (T2–27 °C)]
or T2 = 218 °C. ⊳
∆A3 = (∆a) (∆b)
∆Al = a (∆b)
∆A2 = b (∆a)
a
b
∆b
∆a
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 7 :
 208
PHYSICS
10.6  SPECIFIC HEAT CAPACITY
Take some water in a vessel and start heating it
on a burner. Soon you will notice that bubbles
begin to move upward. As the temperature is
raised the motion of water particles increases
till it becomes turbulent as water starts boiling.
What are the factors on which the quantity of
heat required to raise the temperature of a
substance depend? In order to answer this
question in the first step, heat a given quantity
of water to raise its temperature by, say 20 °C
and note the time taken. Again take the same
amount of water and raise its temperature by
40 °C using the same source of heat. Note the
time taken by using a stopwatch. You will find it
takes about twice the time and therefore, double
the quantity of heat required raising twice the
temperature of same amount of water.
In the second step, now suppose you take
double the amount of water and heat it, using
the same heating arrangement, to raise the
temperature by 20 °C, you will find the time taken
is again twice that required in the first step.
In the third step, in place of water, now heat
the same quantity of some oil, say mustard oil,
and raise the temperature again by 20 °C. Now
note the time by the same stopwatch. You will
find the time taken will be shorter and therefore,
the quantity of heat required would be less than
that required by the same amount of water for
the same rise in temperature.
The above observations show that the quantity
of heat required to warm a given substance
depends on its mass, m, the change in
temperature, ∆T and the nature of substance.
The change in temperature of a substance, when
a given quantity of heat is absorbed or rejected
by it, is characterised by a quantity called the
heat capacity of that substance. We define heat
capacity, S of a substance as
Q
S
T
∆
= ∆
(10.10)
where ∆Q is the amount of heat supplied to
the substance to change its temperature from T
to T + ∆T.
You have observed that if equal amount of
heat is added to equal masses of different
substances, the resulting temperature changes
will not be the same. It implies that every
substance has a unique value for the amount of
heat absorbed or given off to change the
temperature of unit mass of it by one unit. This
quantity is referred to as the specific heat
capacity of the substance.
If ∆Q stands for the amount of heat absorbed
or given off by a substance of mass m when it
undergoes a temperature change ∆T, then the
specific heat capacity, of that substance is given
by
1
S
Q
s
m
m
T
∆
=
=
∆
(10.11)
The specific heat capacity is the property of
the substance which determines the change in
the temperature of the substance (undergoing
no phase change) when a given quantity of heat
is absorbed (or given off) by it. It is defined as the
amount of heat per unit mass absorbed or given
off by the substance to change its temperature
by one unit. It depends on the nature of the
substance and its temperature. The SI unit of
specific heat capacity is J kg–1 K–1.
If the amount of substance is specified in
terms of moles µ, instead of mass m in kg, we
can define heat capacity per mole of the
substance by
(10.12)
where C is known as molar specific heat
capacity of the substance. Like S, C also
depends on the nature of the substance and its
temperature. The SI unit of molar specific heat
capacity is J mol–1 K–1.
However, in connection with specific heat
capacity of gases, additional conditions may be
needed to define C. In this case, heat transfer
can be achieved by keeping either pressure or
volume constant. If the gas is held under
constant pressure during the heat transfer, then
it is called the molar specific heat capacity at
constant pressure and is denoted by Cp. On
the other hand, if the volume of the gas is
maintained during the heat transfer, then the
corresponding molar specific heat capacity is
called molar specific heat capacity at constant
volume and is denoted by Cv. For details see
Chapter 11. Table 10.3 lists measured specific
heat capacity of some substances at atmospheric
pressure and ordinary temperature while Table
10.4 lists molar specific heat capacities of some
gases. From Table 10.3 you can note that water
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 8 :
 THERMAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
209
⊳
has the highest specific heat capacity compared
to other substances. For this reason water is also
used as a coolant in automobile radiators, as
well as, a heater in hot water bags. Owing to its
high specific heat capacity, water warms up
more slowly than land during summer, and
consequently wind from the sea has a cooling
effect. Now, you can tell why in desert areas,
the earth surface warms up quickly during the
day and cools quickly at night.
Table 10.4
Molar specific heat capacities of
some gases
Gas
Cp (J mol–1K–1)
 Cv(J mol–1K–1)
He
20.8
12.5
H2
28.8
20.4
N2
29.1
20.8
O2
29.4
21.1
CO2
37.0
28.5
10.7  CALORIMETRY
A system is said to be isolated if no exchange or
transfer of heat occurs between the system and
its surroundings. When different parts of an
isolated system are at different temperature, a
quantity of heat transfers from the part at higher
temperature to the part at lower temperature.
The heat lost by the part at higher temperature
is equal to the heat gained by the part at lower
temperature.
Calorimetry means measurement of heat.
When a body at higher temperature is brought
in contact with another body at lower
temperature, the heat lost by the hot body is
equal to the heat gained by the colder body,
provided no heat is allowed to escape to the
surroundings. A device in which heat
measurement can be done is called a
calorimeter. It consists of a metallic vessel and
stirrer of the same material, like copper or
aluminium. The vessel is kept inside a wooden
jacket, which contains heat insulating material,
like glass wool etc. The outer jacket acts as a
heat shield and reduces the heat loss from the
inner vessel. There is an opening in the outer
jacket through which a mercury thermometer
can be inserted into the calorimeter (Fig. 10.20).
The following example provides a method by
which the specific heat capacity of a given solid
can be determinated by using the principle, heat
gained is equal to the heat lost.
Example 10.3 A sphere of 0.047 kg
aluminium is placed for sufficient time in a
vessel containing boiling water, so that the
sphere is at 100 °C. It is then immediately
transfered to 0.14 kg copper calorimeter
containing 0.25 kg water at 20 °C. The
temperature of water rises and attains a
steady state at 23 °C. Calculate the specific
heat capacity of aluminium.
Answer  In solving this example, we shall use
the fact that at a steady  state, heat given by an
aluminium sphere will be equal to the heat
absorbed by the water and calorimeter.
Mass of aluminium sphere (m1) = 0.047 kg
Initial temperature of aluminium sphere = 100 °C
Final temperature = 23 °C
Change in temperature (∆T)=(100 °C-23°C)= 77 °C
Let specific heat capacity of aluminium be sAl.
Table 10.3
Specific heat capacity of some substances at room temperature and atmospheric
pressure
Substance
Specific heat capacity
Substance
Specific heat capacity
 (J kg–1 K–1)
(J kg–1 K–1)
Aluminium
900.0
Ice
2060
Carbon
506.5
Glass
840
Copper
386.4
Iron
450
Lead
127.7
Kerosene
2118
Silver
236.1
Edible oil
1965
Tungesten
134.4
Mercury
140
Water
4186.0
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 9 :
 210
PHYSICS
The amount of heat lost by the aluminium
sphere =  
∆
=
×
×
°
1
0.047kg
77 C
Al
Al
m s
T
s
Mass of water (m2) = 0.25 kg
Mass of calorimeter (m3) = 0.14 kg
Initial temperature of water and calorimeter=20 °C
Final temperature of the mixture = 23 °C
Change in temperature (∆T2) = 23 °C – 20 °C = 3 °C
Specific heat capacity of water (sw)
= 4.18 × 103 J kg–1  K–1
Specific heat capacity of copper calorimeter
= 0.386 × 103 J kg–1  K–1
The amount of heat gained by water and
calorimeter = m2 sw ∆T2 + m3scu∆T2
= (m2sw + m3scu) (∆T2)
= (0.25 kg × 4.18 × 103 J kg–1  K–1 + 0.14 kg ×
0.386 × 103 J kg–1  K–1) (23 °C – 20 °C)
In the steady state heat lost by the aluminium
sphere = heat gained by water + heat gained by
calorimeter.
So, 0.047 kg × sAl × 77 °C
= (0.25 kg × 4.18 × 103 J kg–1  K–1+ 0.14 kg ×
0.386 × 103 J kg–1  K–1)(3 °C)
sAl = 0.911 kJ kg –1 K–1
⊳
10.8  CHANGE OF STATE
Matter normally exists in three states: solid,
liquid and gas. A transition from one of these
states to another is called a change of state. Two
common changes of states are solid to liquid
and liquid to gas (and, vice versa). These changes
can occur when the exchange of heat takes place
between the substance and its surroundings.
To study the change of state on heating or
cooling, let us perform the following activity.
Take some cubes of ice in a beaker. Note the
temperature of ice. Start heating it slowly on a
constant heat source. Note the temperature after
every  minute.  Continuously stir the mixture of
water and ice. Draw a graph between
temperature and time (Fig. 10.9). You will observe
no change in the temperature as long as there
is ice in the beaker. In the above process, the
temperature of the system does not change even
though heat is being continuously supplied. The
heat supplied  is being utilised in changing the
state from solid (ice) to liquid (water).
Fig. 10.9
A plot of temperature versus time showing
the changes in the state of ice on heating
(not to scale).
The change of state from solid to liquid is called
melting or fusion and from liquid to solid is called
freezing. It is observed that the temperature
remains constant until the entire amount of the
solid substance melts. That is, both the solid and
the liquid states of the substance coexist in
thermal equilibrium during the change of
states from solid to liquid. The temperature at
which the solid and the liquid states of the
substance is in thermal equilibrium with each
other is called its melting point. It is
characteristic of the substance. It also depends
on pressure. The melting point of a substance
at standard atomspheric pressure is called its
normal melting point. Let us do the following
activity to understand the process of melting
of ice.
Take a slab of ice. Take a metallic wire and
fix two blocks, say 5 kg each, at its ends. Put
the wire over the slab as shown in Fig. 10.10.
You will observe that the wire passes through
the ice slab. This happens due to the fact that
just below the wire, ice melts at lower
temperature due to increase in pressure. When
the wire has passed, water above the wire freezes
again. Thus, the wire passes through the slab
and the slab does not split. This phenomenon
of refreezing is called regelation. Skating is
possible on snow due to the formation of water
under the skates. Water is formed due to the
increase of pressure and it acts as a
lubricant.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 10 :
 THERMAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
211
Fig. 10.10
After the whole of ice gets converted into water
and as we continue further heating, we shall see
that temperature begins to rise (Fig.10.9). The
temperature keeps on rising till it reaches nearly
100 °C when it again becomes steady. The heat
supplied is now being utilised to change water
from liquid state to vapour or  gaseous state.
The change of state from liquid to vapour (or
gas) is called vaporisation. It is observed that
the temperature remains constant until the
entire amount of the liquid is converted into
vapour. That is, both the liquid and vapour states
of the substance coexist in thermal equilibrium,
during the change of state from liquid to vapour.
The temperature at which the liquid and the
vapour states of the substance coexist is called
its boiling point. Let us do the following activity
to understand the process of boiling of water.
Take a round-bottom flask, more than half
filled with water. Keep it over a burner and fix a
Triple Point
The temperature of a substance remains constant during its change of state (phase change).
A graph between the temperature T and the Pressure P of the substance is called a phase
diagram or P – T diagram. The following figure shows the phase diagram of water and CO2.
Such a phase diagram divides the P – T plane into a solid-region, the vapour-region and the
liquid-region. The regions are separated by the curves such as sublimation curve (BO), fusion
curve (AO) and vaporisation curve (CO). The points on sublimation curve represent states
in which solid and vapour phases coexist. The point on the sublimation curve BO represent
states in which the solid and vapour phases co-exist. Points on the fusion curve AO represent
states in which solid and liquid phase coexist. Points on the vapourisation curve CO represent
states in which the liquid and vapour phases coexist. The temperature and pressure at which
the fusion curve, the vaporisation curve and the sublimation curve meet and all the three
phases of  a substance coexist is called the triple point of the substance. For example the
triple point of water is represented by the temperature 273.16 K and pressure 6.11×10–3 Pa.
(a)
(b)
Figure :  Pressure-temperature phase diagrams for (a) water and (b) CO2 (not to the scale).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 11 :
 212
PHYSICS
thermometer and steam outlet through the cork
of the flask (Fig. 10.11). As water gets heated in
the flask, note first that the air, which was
dissolved in the water, will come out as small
bubbles. Later, bubbles of steam will form at
the bottom but as they rise to the cooler water
near the top, they condense and disappear.
Finally, as the temperature of the entire mass
of the water reaches 100 °C, bubbles of steam
reach the surface and boiling is said to occur.
The steam in the flask may not be visible but as
it comes out of the flask, it condenses as tiny
droplets of water, giving a foggy appearance.
Fig. 10.11 Boiling process.
If now the steam outlet is closed for a few
seconds to increase the pressure in the flask,
you will notice that boiling stops. More heat
would be required to raise the temperature
(depending on the increase in pressure) before
boiling begins again. Thus boiling point increases
with increase in pressure.
Let us now remove the burner. Allow water to
cool to about 80 °C. Remove the thermometer and
steam outlet. Close the flask with the airtight
cork. Keep the flask turned upside down on the
stand. Pour ice-cold water on the flask. Water
vapours in the flask condense reducing the
pressure on the water surface inside the flask.
Water begins to boil again, now at a lower
temperature. Thus boiling point decreases with
decrease in pressure.
This explains why cooking is difficult on hills.
At high altitudes, atmospheric pressure is lower,
reducing the boiling point of water as compared
to that at sea level. On the other hand, boiling
point is increased inside a pressure cooker by
increasing the pressure. Hence cooking is faster.
The boiling point of a substance at standard
atmospheric pressure is called its normal
boiling point.
However, all substances do not pass through
the three states: solid-liquid-gas. There are
certain substances which normally pass from
the solid to the vapour state directly and vice
versa. The change from solid state to vapour
state without passing through the liquid state
is called sublimation, and the substance is said
to sublime. Dry ice (solid CO2) sublimes, so also
iodine. During the sublimation process both the
solid and vapour states of a substance coexist
in thermal equilibrium.
10.8.1  Latent Heat
In Section 10.8, we have learnt that certain
amount of heat energy is transferred between a
substance and its surroundings when it
undergoes a change of state. The amount of heat
per unit mass transferred during change of state
of the substance is called latent heat of the
substance for the process. For example, if heat
is added to a given quantity of ice at –10 °C, the
temperature of ice increases until it reaches its
melting point (0 °C). At this temperature, the
addition of more heat does not increase the
temperature but causes the ice to melt, or
changes its state. Once the entire ice melts,
adding more heat will cause the temperature of
the water to rise. A similar situation
occurs during liquid gas change of state at the
boiling point. Adding more heat to boiling water
causes vaporisation, without increase in
temperature.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 12 :
 THERMAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
213
⊳
The heat required during a change of state
depends upon the heat of transformation and
the mass of the substance undergoing a change
of state. Thus, if mass m of a substance
undergoes a change from one state to the other,
then the quantity of heat required is given by
Q = m L
or
L = Q/m
(10.13)
where L is known as latent heat and is a
characteristic of the substance. Its SI unit is
J kg–1. The value of L also depends on the
pressure. Its value is usually quoted at standard
atmospheric pressure. The latent heat for a solid-
liquid state change is called the latent heat of
fusion (Lf), and that for a liquid-gas state change
is called the latent heat of vaporisation (Lv).
These are often referred to as the heat of fusion
and the heat of vaporisation. A plot of
temperature versus heat  for a quantity of water
is shown in Fig. 10.12. The latent heats of some
substances, their freezing and boiling points, are
given in Table 10.5.
Fig. 10.12 Temperature versus heat for water at
1 atm pressure (not to scale).
Note that when heat is added (or removed)
during a change of state, the temperature
remains constant. Note in Fig. 10.12 that the
slopes of the phase lines are not all the same,
which indicate that specific heats of the various
states are not equal. For water, the latent heat of
fusion and vaporisation are Lf = 3.33 × 105 J kg–1
and Lv = 22.6 × 105 J kg–1, respectively. That is,
3.33 × 105 J of heat is needed to melt 1 kg ice at
0 °C, and 22.6 × 105 J of heat is needed to convert
1 kg  water into steam at 100 °C. So, steam at
100 °C carries  22.6 × 105 J  kg–1 more heat than
water at 100 °C. This is why burns from steam
are usually more serious than those from
boiling water.
Example 10.4 When 0.15 kg of ice at 0 °C
is mixed with 0.30 kg of water at 50 °C in a
container, the resulting temperature is
6.7 °C. Calculate the heat of fusion of ice.
(swater = 4186 J kg–1 K–1)
Answer
Heat lost by water = msw (θf–θi)w
= (0.30 kg) (4186 J kg–1 K–1) (50.0 °C – 6.7 °C)
= 54376.14 J
Heat required to melt ice = m2Lf = (0.15 kg) Lf
Heat required to raise temperature of ice
water to final temperature = mIsw (θf–θi)I
= (0.15 kg) (4186 J kg–1 K –1) (6.7 °C – 0 °C)
= 4206.93 J
Heat lost = heat gained
54376.14 J = (0.15 kg) Lf + 4206.93 J
Lf = 3.34×105 J kg–1.
⊳
Table 10.5
Temperatures of the change of state and latent heats for various substances at
1 atm pressure
Substance
Melting
Lf
Boiling
Lv
Point (°C)
(105J kg–1)
Point (°C)
(105J kg–1)
Ethanol
–114
1.0
78
8.5
Gold
1063
0.645
2660
15.8
Lead
328
0.25
1744
8.67
Mercury
–39
0.12
357
2.7
Nitrogen
–210
0.26
–196
2.0
Oxygen
–219
0.14
–183
2.1
Water
0
3.33
100
22.6
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 13 :
 214
PHYSICS
⊳
Example 10.5 Calculate the heat required
to convert 3 kg of ice at –12 °C kept in a
calorimeter to steam at 100  °C at
atmospheric pressure. Given specific heat
capacity of ice = 2100 J kg–1 K–1, specific heat
capacity of water = 4186 J kg– 1 K–1, latent
heat of fusion of ice = 3.35 × 105 J kg–1
and latent heat of steam = 2.256 ×106 J kg–1.
Answer  We have
Mass of the ice, m = 3 kg
specific heat capacity of ice, sice
= 2100 J kg–1  K–1
specific heat capacity of water, swater
= 4186 J kg–1  K–1
latent heat of fusion of ice, Lf ice
= 3.35 × 105 J kg–1
latent heat of steam, Lsteam
= 2.256 × 106 J kg–1
Now,
Q
=
heat required to convert 3 kg of
ice at –12 °C to steam at 100 °C,
Q1
=
heat required to convert ice at
–12 °C to ice at 0 °C.
=
m sice ∆T1 = (3 kg) (2100 J kg–1.
K–1) [0–(–12)]°C = 75600 J
Q2
=
heat required to melt ice at
0 °C to water at 0 °C
=
m Lf ice = (3 kg) (3.35 × 105 J kg–1)
=
 1005000 J
Q3
=
heat required to convert water
at 0 °C to water at 100 °C.
=
msw ∆T2 = (3kg) (4186J kg–1 K–1)
(100 °C)
=
1255800 J
Q4
=
heat required to convert water
at 100 °C to steam at 100 °C.
=
m Lsteam = (3 kg) (2.256 ×106
J kg–1)
=
6768000 J
So,
Q
=
Q1 + Q2 + Q3 + Q4
=
75600J + 1005000 J
+ 1255800 J + 6768000 J
=
9.1×106 J
⊳
10.9  HEAT TRANSFER
We have seen that heat is energy transfer
from one system to another or from one part
of a system to another part, arising due to
temperature difference. What are the different
ways by which this energy transfer takes
place? There are three distinct modes of heat
transfer: conduction, convection and radiation
(Fig. 10.13).
Fig. 10.13
Heating by conduction, convection and
radiation.
10.9.1  Conduction
Conduction is the mechanism of transfer of heat
between two adjacent parts of a body because
of their temperature difference. Suppose, one end
of a metallic rod is put in a flame, the other end
of the rod will soon be so hot that you cannot
hold it by your bare hands. Here, heat transfer
takes place by conduction from the hot end of
the rod through its different parts to the other
end.  Gases are poor thermal conductors, while
liquids have conductivities intermediate between
solids and gases.
Heat conduction may be described
quantitatively as the time rate of heat flow in a
material for a given temperature difference.
Consider a metallic bar of length L and uniform
cross-section A with its two ends maintained at
different temperatures. This can be done, for
example, by putting the ends in thermal contact
with large reservoirs at temperatures, say, TC and
TD, respectively (Fig. 10.14). Let us assume the
ideal condition that the sides of the bar are fully
insulated so that no heat is exchanged between
the sides and the surroundings.
After sometime, a steady state is reached; the
temperature of the bar decreases uniformly with
distance from TC to TD; (TC>TD). The reservoir at
C supplies heat at a constant rate, which
transfers through the bar and is given out at
the same rate to the reservoir at D. It is found
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 14 :
 THERMAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
215
⊳
experimentally that in this steady state, the rate
of flow of heat (or heat current) H is proportional
to the temperature difference (TC – TD) and the
area of cross-section A and is inversely
proportional to the length L :
H = KA 
–
C
D
T
T
L
(10.14)
The constant of proportionality K is called the
thermal conductivity of the material. The
greater the value of K for a material, the more
rapidly will it conduct heat. The SI unit of K is
J s–1 m –1 K–1 or W m –1 K–1. The thermal
conductivities of various substances are listed
in Table 10.6. These values vary slightly with
temperature, but can be considered to be
constant over a normal temperature range.
Compare the relatively large thermal
conductivities of  good thermal conductors and,
metals, with the relatively small thermal
conductivities of some good thermal insulators,
such as wood and glass wool. You may have
noticed that some cooking pots have copper
coating on the bottom. Being a good conductor
of heat, copper promotes the distribution of heat
over the bottom of a pot for uniform cooking.
Plastic foams, on the other hand, are good
insulators, mainly because they contain pockets
of air. Recall that gases are poor conductors,
and note the low thermal conductivity of air in
the Table 10.5. Heat retention and transfer are
important in many other applications. Houses
made of concrete roofs get very hot during
summer days because thermal conductivity of
concrete (though much smaller than that of a
metal) is still not small enough. Therefore, people,
usually, prefer to give a layer of earth or foam
insulation on the ceiling so that heat transfer is
prohibited and keeps the room cooler. In some
situations, heat transfer is critical. In a nuclear
reactor, for example, elaborate heat transfer
systems need to be installed so that the
enormous energy produced by nuclear fission
in the core transits out sufficiently fast, thus
preventing the core from overheating.
Table 10.6
Thermal conductivities of some
      material
Material
Thermal conductivity
(J s–1 m–1 K–1 )
Metals
Silver
406
Copper
385
Aluminium
205
Brass
109
Steel
50.2
Lead
34.7
Mercury
8.3
Non-metals
Insulating brick
0.15
Concrete
0.8
Body fat
0.20
Felt
0.04
Glass
0.8
Ice
1.6
Glass wool
0.04
Wood
0.12
Water
0.8
Gases
Air
0.024
Argon
0.016
Hydrogen
0.14
Example 10.6 What is the temperature of
the steel-copper junction in the steady
state of the system shown in Fig. 10.15.
Length of the steel rod = 15.0 cm, length
of the copper rod = 10.0 cm, temperature
of the furnace = 300 °C, temperature of the
other end = 0 °C. The area of cross section
of the steel rod is twice that of the copper
rod. (Thermal conductivity of steel
= 50.2 J s –1 m –1 K –1; and of copper
= 385 J s–1m–1 K–1).
Fig. 10.14 Steady state heat flow by conduction in
a bar with its two ends maintained at
temperatures TC and TD; (TC > TD).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 15 :
 216
PHYSICS
⊳
Fig. 10.15
Answer  The insulating material around the rods
reduces heat loss from the sides of the rods.
Therefore, heat flows only along the length of
the rods. Consider any cross section of the rod.
In the steady state, heat flowing into the element
must equal the heat flowing out of it; otherwise
there would be a net gain or loss of heat by the
element and its temperature would not be
steady. Thus in the steady state, rate of heat
flowing across a cross section of the rod is the
same at every point along the length of the
combined steel-copper rod. Let T be the
temperature of the steel-copper junction in the
steady state. Then,
(
)
(
)
1
1
2
2
1
2
300
0
K  A
T
K  A
T –
= 
L
L
−
where 1 and 2 refer to the steel and copper rod
respectively.  For A1 = 2 A2, L1 = 15.0 cm,
L2 = 10.0 cm, K1 = 50.2 J s–1 m–1 K –1, K2 = 385 J
s–1 m–1 K –1, we have
(
)
50.2  2 300
385
15
10
T
T
= 
×
−
which gives T = 44.4 °C
⊳
Example 10.7 An iron bar (L1 = 0.1 m, A1 =
0.02 m 2, K 1 = 79 W m –1 K –1) and a
brass bar (L2 = 0.1 m, A2 = 0.02 m2,
K2 = 109 W m–1K–1) are soldered end to end
as shown in  Fig. 10.16.   The free ends of
the iron bar and brass bar are maintained
at 373 K and 273 K respectively. Obtain
expressions for and hence compute (i) the
temperature of the junction of the two bars,
(ii) the equivalent thermal conductivity of
the compound bar, and (iii) the heat
current through the compound bar.
Fig 10.16
Answer
Given, L1 = L2= L = 0.1 m, A1 = A2= A= 0.02 m2
K1 = 79 W m–1 K –1, K2 = 109 W m–1 K–1,
T1 = 373 K, and T2 = 273 K.
Under steady state condition, the heat
current (H1) through iron bar is equal to the
heat current (H2) through brass bar.
So, H = H1 = H2
  =  
(
)
1
1
1
0
2
2
0
2
1
2
–
(
–
)
K A
T
T
K A
T
T
L
L
=
For A1 = A2 = A and L1 = L2 = L, this equation
leads to
K1 (T1 – T0) = K2 (T0 – T2)
Thus, the junction temperature T0 of the two
bars is
T0 = (
)
(
)
1
1
2
2
1
2
K T
K T
K
K
+
+
Using this equation, the heat current H through
either bar is
H =
(
)
1
1
0
2
0
2
–
(
–
)
K A T
T
K A T
T
L
L
=
   
Using these equations, the heat current H′
through the compound bar of length L1 + L2 = 2L
and the equivalent thermal conductivity K′, of
the compound bar are given by
(
)
1
2
–
2
K
A
T
T
H
H
L
′
=
=
′
1
2
1
2
2
=
′
+
K K
K
K
K
(i) 
(
)
(
)
1
1
2
2
0
1
2
K T
K T
T
K
K
+
=
+
     (
)(
) (
)(
)
–1
–1
–1
–1
–1
–1
–1
–1
79
m K
373 K
109 W m K
273 K
79 W m K
109 W m K
W
+
=
+
= 315 K
(ii) 
1
2
1
2
2
 
 = 
K
K
K
K
K
′
+
    = 
–1
–1
–1
–1
–1
–1
–1
–1
2×(79 W m
K
) ×(109 W m
K
)
79 W m
K
+109 W m
K
    = 91.6 W m–1 K–1
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 16 :
 THERMAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
217
(iii) 
(
)
1
2
–
2
K
A
T
T
H
H
L
′
=
=
′
 
(
) (
)
(
)
(
)
–1
–1
2
91.6 W m
K
× 0.02 m
 × 373 K–273 K
2× 0.1 m
=
  = 916.1 W
⊳
10.9.2  Convection
Convection is a mode of heat transfer by actual
motion of matter. It is  possible only in fluids.
Convection can be natural or forced. In natural
convection, gravity plays an important part.
When a fluid is heated from below, the hot part
expands and, therefore, becomes less dense.
Because of buoyancy, it rises and the upper
colder part replaces it. This again gets heated,
rises up and is replaced by the relatively colder
part of the fluid. The process goes on. This mode
of heat transfer is evidently different from
conduction. Convection involves bulk transport
of different parts of the fluid.
     In forced convection, material is forced to move
by a pump or by some other physical means. The
common  examples of forced convection systems
are forced-air heating systems in home, the
human circulatory system, and the cooling
system of an automobile engine. In the human
body, the heart acts as the pump that circulates
blood through different parts of the body,
transferring heat by forced convection and
maintaining it at a uniform temperature.
Natural convection is responsible for many
familiar phenomena. During the day, the
ground heats up more quickly than large bodies
of water do. This occurs both because water has
a greater specific heat capacity and because
mixing currents disperse the absorbed heat
throughout the great volume of water. The air
in contact with the warm ground is heated by
conduction. It expands, becoming less dense
than the surrounding cooler air. As a result, the
warm air rises (air currents) and the other air
moves (winds) to fill the space-creating a sea
breeze near a large body of water. Cooler air
descends, and a thermal convection cycle is set
up, which transfers heat away from the land.
At night, the ground loses its heat more quickly,
and the water surface is warmer than the land.
As a result, the cycle is reveresed (Fig. 10.17).
The other example of natural convection is
the steady surface wind on the earth blowing
in from north-east towards the equator, the
so-called trade wind. A resonable explanation
is as follows: the equatorial and polar regions of
the earth receive unequal solar heat. Air at the
earth’s surface near the equator is hot, while
the air in the upper atmosphere of the poles is
cool. In the absence of any other factor, a
convection current would be set up, with the
air at the equatorial surface rising and moving
out towards the poles, descending and
streaming in towards the equator. The rotation
of the earth, however, modifies this convection
current. Because of this, air close to the equator
has an eastward speed of 1600 km/h, while it
is zero close to the poles. As a result, the air
descends not at the poles but at 30° N (North)
latitude and returns to the equator. This is
called trade wind.
Fig. 10.17
Convection cycles.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 17 :
 218
PHYSICS
10.9.3  Radiation
Conduction and convection require some
material as a transport medium. These modes
of heat transfer cannot operate between bodies
separated by a distance in vacuum. But the
earth does receive heat from the Sun across a
huge distance. Similarly, we quickly feel the
warmth of the fire nearby even though air
conducts poorly and before convection takes
some time to set in. The third mechanism for
heat transfer needs no medium; it is called
radiation and the energy so transferred by
electromagnetic waves is called radiant energy.
In an electromagnetic wave, electric and
magnetic fields oscillate in space and time. Like
any wave, electromagnetic waves can have
different wavelengths and can travel in vacuum
with the same speed, namely the speed of light
i.e., 3 × 108 m s–1 . You will learn these matters in
more detail later, but you now know why heat
transfer by radiation does not need any medium
and why it is so fast. This is how heat is
transferred to the earth from the Sun through
empty space. All bodies emit radiant energy,
whether they are solid, liquid or gas. The
electromagnetic radiation emitted by a body by
virtue of its temperature, like radiation by a red
hot iron or light from a filament lamp is called
thermal radiation.
When this thermal radiation falls on other
bodies, it is partly reflected and partly absorbed.
The amount of heat that a body can absorb by
radiation depends on the colour of the body.
We find that black bodies absorb and emit
radiant energy better than  bodies of lighter
colours. This fact finds many applications in our
daily life. We wear white or light coloured clothes
in summer, so that they absorb the least heat
from the Sun. However, during winter, we use
dark coloured clothes, which absorb heat from
the sun and keep our body warm. The bottoms of
utensils for cooking food are blackened so that
they absorb maximum heat from fire and transfer
it to the vegetables to be cooked.
Similarly, a Dewar flask or thermos bottle is
a device to minimise heat transfer between the
contents of the bottle and outside. It consists
of a double-walled glass vessel with the inner
and outer walls coated with silver. Radiation
from the inner wall is reflected back to the
contents of the bottle. The outer wall similarly
reflects back any incoming radiation. The space
between the walls is evacuted to reduce
conduction and convection losses and the flask
is supported on an insulator, like cork. The
device is, therefore, useful for preventing hot
contents (like, milk) from getting cold, or
alternatively, to store cold contents (like, ice).
10.9.4 Blackbody Radiation
We have so far not mentioned the wavelength
content of thermal radiation. The important
thing about thermal radiation at any
temperature is that it is not of one (or a few)
wavelength(s) but has a continuous spectrum
from the small to the long wavelengths. The
energy content of radiation, however, varies for
different wavelengths. Figure 10.18 gives the
experimental curves for radiation energy per unit
area per unit wavelength emitted by a blackbody
versus wavelength for different temperatures.
Fig. 10.18:  Energy emitted versus wavelength
for a blackbody at different
temperatures
Notice that the wavelength λm for which energy
is the maximum decreases with increasing
temperature. The relation between λm and T is
given by what is known as Wien’s Displacement
Law:
λm T  =  constant
(10.15)
The value of the constant (Wien’s constant)
is 2.9 × 10–3 m K. This law explains why the
colour of a piece of iron heated in a hot flame
first becomes dull red, then reddish yellow, and
finally white hot. Wien’s law is useful for
estimating the surface temperatures of celestial
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 18 :
 THERMAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
219
bodies like, the moon, Sun and other stars. Light
from the moon is found to have a maximum
intensity near the wavelength 14 µm. By Wien’s
law, the surface of the moon is estimated to have
a temperature of 200 K. Solar radiation has a
maximum at λm = 4753 Å. This corresponds to
T = 6060 K. Remember, this is the temperature
of the surface of the sun, not its interior.
The most significant feature of the
blackbody radiation curves in Fig. 10.18 is that
they are universal. They depend only on the
temperature and not on the size, shape or
material of the blackbody. Attempts to explain
blackbody radiation theoretically, at the
beginning of the twentieth century, spurred the
quantum revolution in physics, as you will
learn in later courses.
Energy can be transferred by radiation over
large distances, without a medium (i.e., in
vacuum). The total electromagnetic energy
radiated by a body at absolute temperature T
is proportional to its size, its ability to radiate
(called emissivity)  and most importantly to its
temperature. For a body, which is a perfect
radiator, the energy emitted per unit time (H)
is given by
H = AσT 4
(10.16)
where A is the area and T is the absolute
temperature of the body.  This relation obtained
experimentally by Stefan and later proved
theoretically by Boltzmann is known as Stefan-
Boltzmann law and the constant σ is called
Stefan-Boltzmann constant. Its value in SI units
is 5.67 × 10–8 W m–2 K–4. Most bodies emit only a
fraction of the rate given by Eq. 10.16. A substance
like lamp black comes close to the limit. One,
therefore, defines a dimensionless fraction e
called emissivity and writes,
H = AeσT 4
(10.17)
Here, e = 1 for a perfect radiator. For a tungsten
lamp, for example, e is about 0.4. Thus, a tungsten
lamp at a temperature of 3000 K and a surface
area of 0.3 cm2 radiates at the rate  H = 0.3 ×
10–4 × 0.4 × 5.67 × 10–8 × (3000)4 = 60 W.
A body at temperature T, with surroundings
at temperatures Ts, emits, as well as, receives
energy. For a perfect radiator, the net rate of
loss of radiant energy is
H = σA (T 4 – Ts
4)
For a body with emissivity e, the relation
modifies to
H = eσ A (T4 – Ts
4)
(10.18)
As an example, let us estimate the heat
radiated by our bodies. Suppose the surface area
of a person’s body is about 1.9 m2 and the room
temperature is 22 °C. The internal body
temperature, as we know, is about 37 °°C.  The
skin temperature may be 28°°C (say). The
emissivity of the skin is about 0.97 for the
relevant region of electromagnetic radiation. The
rate of heat loss is:
H = 5.67 × 10–8 × 1.9 × 0.97 × {(301)4 – (295)4}
 = 66.4 W
which is more than half the rate of energy
production by the body at rest (120 W). To
prevent this heat loss effectively (better than
ordinary clothing), modern arctic clothing has
an additional thin shiny metallic layer next to
the skin, which reflects the body’s radiation.
10.10  NEWTON’S LAW OF COOLING
We all know that hot water or milk when left on
a table begins to cool, gradually. Ultimately it
attains the temperature of the surroundings. To
study how slow or fast a given body can cool on
exchanging heat with its surroundings, let us
perform the following activity.
Take some water, say 300 mL, in a
calorimeter with a stirrer and cover it with a
two-holed lid. Fix the stirrer through one hole
and fix a thermometer through another hole
in the lid and make sure that the bulb of
thermometer is immersed in the water. Note
the reading of the thermometer. This reading
T1 is the temperature of the surroundings.
Heat the water kept in the calorimeter till it
attains a temperature, say 40 °C above room
temperature (i.e., temperature of the
surroundings). Then, stop heating the water
by removing the heat source. Start the
stop-watch and note the reading of the
thermometer after a fixed interval of time, say
after every one minute of stirring gently with
the stirrer. Continue to note the temperature
(T2) of water till it attains a temperature about
5 °C above that of the surroundings. Then, plot
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 19 :
 220
PHYSICS
a graph by taking each value of temperature
∆T = T2 – T1 along y-axis and the coresponding
value of  t along x-axis (Fig. 10.19).
Fig. 10.19 Curve showing cooling of hot water
with time.
From the graph you can infer how the cooling
of hot water depends on the difference of its
temperature from that of the surroundings. You
will also notice that initially the rate of cooling
is higher and decreases as the temperature of
the body falls.
The above activity shows that a hot body loses
heat to its surroundings in the form of heat
radiation. The rate of loss of heat depends on
the difference in temperature between the body
and its surroundings. Newton was the first to
study, in a systematic manner, the relation
between the heat lost by a body in a given
enclosure and its temperature.
According to Newton’s law of cooling, the rate
of loss of heat, – dQ/dt of the body is directly
proportional to the difference of temperature
∆T = (T2–T1) of the body and the surroundings.
The law holds good only for small difference of
temperature. Also, the loss of  heat by radiation
depends upon the nature of the surface of the
body and the area of the exposed surface. We
can write
– 
(10.19)
where k is a positive constant depending upon
the area and nature of the surface of the body.
Suppose a body of mass m and specific heat
capacity s is at temperature T2. Let T1 be the
temperature of the surroundings. If the
temperature falls by a small amount dT2 in time
dt, then the amount of heat lost is
dQ = ms dT2
∴ Rate of loss of heat is given by
dQ
dt
ms dT
dt
=
2
(10.20)
From Eqs. (10.15) and (10.16) we have
–
(
–
)
m s dT
dt
k T
T
2
2
1
=
dT
T
T
k
ms dt
K dt
2
2
1
–
–
–
=
=
(10.21)
where K = k/m s
On integrating,
loge (T2 – T1) = – K t + c
(10.22)
or T2 = T1 + C′ e–Kt; where C′ = ec
(10.23)
Equation (10.23) enables you to calculate the
time of cooling of a body through a particular
range of temperature.
For small temperature differences, the rate
of cooling, due to conduction, convection, and
radiation combined, is proportional to the
difference in temperature. It is a valid
approximation in the transfer of heat from a
radiator to a room, the loss of heat through the
wall of a room, or the cooling of a cup of tea on
the table.
Fig. 10.20 Verification of Newton’s Law of cooling.
Newton’s law of cooling can be verified with
the help of the experimental set-up shown in
Fig. 10.20(a). The set-up consists of a double-
walled vessel (V) containing water  between
the two walls. A copper calorimeter (C)
containing hot water is placed inside the
double-walled vessel. Two thermometers
through the corks are used to note the
temperatures T2 of water in calorimeter and
T1 of hot water in between the double walls,
respectively. Temperature of hot water in the
calorimeter is noted after equal intervals of
time. A graph is plotted between log e (T2–T1)
[or ln(T2–T1)] and time (t). The nature of the
∆
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 20 :
 THERMAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
221
⊳
graph is observed to be a straight line having
a negative slope as shown in Fig. 10.20(b). This
is in support of Eq. 10.22.
Example 10.8  A pan filled with hot food
cools from 94 °C to 86 °C in 2 minutes when
the room temperature is at 20 °C. How long
will it take to cool from 71 °C to 69 °C?
Answer  The average temperature of 94 °C and
86 °C is 90 °C, which is 70 °C above the room
temperature. Under these conditions the pan
cools 8 °C in 2 minutes.
Using Eq. (10.21), we have
Change in temperature
Time
K T
=
∆
SUMMARY
1.
Heat is a form of energy that flows between a body and its surrounding medium by
virtue of temperature difference between them. The degree of hotness of the body is
quantitatively represented by temperature.
2.
A temperature-measuring device (thermometer) makes use of some measurable property
(called thermometric property) that changes with temperature. Different thermometers
lead to different temperature scales. To construct a temperature scale, two fixed points
are chosen and assigned some arbitrary values of temperature. The two numbers fix
the origin of the scale and the size of its unit.
3.
The Celsius temperature (tC) and the Farenheit temperare (tF)are related by
tF = (9/5) tC + 32
4.
The ideal gas equation connecting pressure (P), volume (V) and absolute temperature (T)
is :
PV = µRT
where µ is the number of moles and R is the universal gas constant.
5.
In the absolute temperature scale, the zero of the scale  corresponds to the temperature
where every substance in nature has the least possible molecular activity. The Kelvin
absolute temperature scale (T ) has the same unit size as the Celsius scale (Tc ), but
differs in the origin :
TC   =  T – 273.15
6.
The coefficient of linear expansion (αl ) and volume expansion (αv ) are defined by the
relations :
l
l
T
l
α
∆=
∆
V
V
T
V
α
∆
=
∆
(
)
°
°
8 C =
70 C
2 min
K
The average of 69 °C and 71 °C is 70 °C, which
is 50 °C above room temperature. K is the same
for this situation as for the original.
°
2 C
Time  = K (50 °C)
When we divide above two equations, we
have
8 C/2 min
(70 C)
=
2 C/time
(50 C)
K
K
°
°
°
°
Time = 0.7 min
        = 42 s
⊳
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 21 :
 222
PHYSICS
where ∆l  and  ∆V denote the change in length l and volume V for a change of temperature
∆T.  The relation between them is :
αv  =  3 αl
7.
The specific heat capacity of a substance is defined by
s
m
Q
T
= 1 ∆
∆
where m is the mass of the substance and ∆Q is the heat required to change its
temperature by ∆T.  The molar specific heat capacity of a substance is defined by
1
Q
C
T
µ
∆
=
∆
where µ is the number  of moles of the substance.
8.
The latent heat of fusion (Lf) is the heat per unit mass required to change a substance
from solid into liquid at the same temperature and pressure. The latent heat of
vaporisation (Lv) is the heat per unit mass required to change a substance from liquid
to the vapour state without change in the temperature and pressure.
9.
The three modes of heat transfer are conduction, convection and radiation.
10. In conduction, heat is transferred between neighbouring parts of a body through
molecular collisions, without any flow of matter.  For a bar of length L and uniform
cross section A with its ends maintained at temperatures TC and TD, the rate of flow of
heat H is :
 
C
D
 
T
T
H = K A
L
−
where K is the thermal conductivity of the material of the bar.
11. Newton’s Law of Cooling says that the rate of cooling of a body is proportional to the
excess temperature of the body over the surroundings :
2
1
d
(
)
d
Q = – k T  – T    
t
Where T1 is the temperature of the surrounding medium and T2 is the temperature of
the body.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 22 :
 THERMAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
223
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
The relation connecting Kelvin temperature (T ) and the Celsius temperature tc
T  =  tc + 273.15
and the assignment T = 273.16 K for the triple point of water are exact relations (by
choice). With this choice, the Celsius temperature of the melting point of water and
boiling point of water (both at 1 atm pressure) are very close to, but not exactly equal
to 0 °C and 100 °C respectively.  In the original Celsius scale, these latter fixed points
were exactly at 0 °C and 100 °C (by choice), but now the triple point of water is the
preferred choice for the fixed point, because it has a unique temperature.
2.
A liquid in equilibrium with vapour has the same pressure and temperature throughout
the system; the two phases in equilibrium differ in their molar volume (i.e. density).
This is true for a system with any number of phases in equilibrium.
3.
Heat transfer always involves temperature difference between two systems or two parts
of the same system. Any energy transfer that does not involve temperature difference
in some way is not heat.
4.
Convection involves flow of matter within a fluid due to unequal temperatures of its
parts. A hot bar placed under a running tap loses heat by conduction between the
surface of the bar and water and not by convection within water.
EXERCISES
10.1
The triple points of neon and carbon dioxide are 24.57 K and 216.55 K respectively.
Express these temperatures on the Celsius and Fahrenheit scales.
10.2
Two absolute scales A and B have triple points of water defined to be 200 A and    350
B. What is the relation between TA and TB ?
10.3
The electrical resistance in ohms of a certain thermometer varies with temperature
according to the approximate law :
R = Ro [1 + α (T – To )]
The resistance is 101.6 Ω at the triple-point of water 273.16 K, and 165.5 Ω at the
normal melting point of lead (600.5 K). What is the temperature when the resistance
is 123.4 Ω ?
10.4
Answer the following :
(a)
The triple-point of water is a standard fixed point in modern thermometry.
Why ? What is wrong in taking the melting point of ice and the boiling point
of water as standard fixed points (as was originally done in the Celsius scale) ?
(b)
There were two fixed points in the original Celsius scale as mentioned above
which were assigned the number 0 °C and 100 °C respectively. On the absolute
scale, one of the fixed points is the triple-point of water, which on the Kelvin
absolute scale is assigned the number 273.16 K. What is the other fixed point
on this (Kelvin) scale ?
(c)
The absolute temperature (Kelvin scale) T is related to the temperature tc on
the Celsius scale by
tc = T – 273.15
Why do we have 273.15 in this relation, and not 273.16 ?
(d)
What is the temperature of the triple-point of water on an absolute scale
whose unit interval size is equal to that of the Fahrenheit scale ?
10.5
Two ideal gas thermometers A and B use oxygen and hydrogen respectively.  The
following observations are made :
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 23 :
 224
PHYSICS
Temperature
Pressure
Pressure
thermometer A
thermometer B
Triple-point of water
1.250 × 105 Pa
0.200 × 105 Pa
Normal melting point
1.797 × 105 Pa
0.287 × 105 Pa
of sulphur
(a)
What is the absolute temperature of normal melting point of sulphur as read
by thermometers A and B ?
(b)
What do you think is the reason behind the slight difference in answers of
thermometers A and B ? (The thermometers are not faulty). What further
procedure is needed in the experiment to reduce  the discrepancy between the
two readings ?
10.6
A steel tape 1m long is correctly calibrated for a temperature of 27.0 °C.  The length
of a steel rod measured by this tape is found to be 63.0 cm on a hot day when the
temperature is 45.0 °C. What is the actual length of the steel rod on that day ?
What is the length of the same steel rod on a day when the temperature is 27.0 °C
?  Coefficient of linear expansion of steel = 1.20 × 10–5 K–1 .
10.7
A large steel wheel is to be fitted on to a shaft of the same material. At 27 °C, the
outer diameter of the shaft is 8.70 cm and the diameter of the central hole in the
wheel is 8.69 cm. The shaft is cooled using ‘dry ice’. At what temperature of the
shaft does the wheel slip on the shaft? Assume coefficient of linear expansion of
the steel to be constant over the required temperature range :
αsteel = 1.20 × 10–5 K–1.
10.8
A hole is drilled in a copper sheet. The diameter of the hole is 4.24 cm at 27.0 °C.
What is the change in the diameter of the hole when the sheet is heated to 227 °C?
Coefficient of linear expansion of copper = 1.70 × 10–5 K–1.
10.9
A brass wire 1.8 m long at 27 °C is held taut with little tension between two rigid
supports. If the wire is cooled to a temperature of –39 °C, what is the tension
developed in the  wire, if its diameter is 2.0 mm ?  Co-efficient of linear expansion
of  brass = 2.0 × 10–5 K–1; Young’s modulus of brass = 0.91 × 1011 Pa.
10.10
A brass rod of length 50 cm and diameter 3.0 mm is joined to a steel rod of the same
length and diameter. What is the change in length of the combined rod at 250 °C, if
the original lengths are at 40.0 °C?  Is there a ‘thermal stress’ developed at the
junction ? The ends of the rod are free to expand (Co-efficient of linear expansion of
brass = 2.0 × 10–5 K–1, steel = 1.2 × 10–5 K–1 ).
10.11
The coefficient of volume expansion of glycerine is 49 × 10–5 K–1.  What is the fractional
change in its density for a 30 °C rise in temperature ?
10.12
A 10 kW drilling machine is used to drill a bore in a small aluminium block of mass
8.0 kg.  How much is the rise in temperature of the block in 2.5 minutes, assuming
50% of power is used up in heating the machine itself or lost to the surroundings.
Specific heat of aluminium = 0.91 J g–1 K–1.
10.13
A copper block of mass 2.5 kg is heated in a furnace to a temperature of 500 °C and
then placed on a large ice block. What is the maximum amount of  ice that can
melt? (Specific heat of copper = 0.39 J g–1 K–1; heat of fusion of water
= 335 J g–1 ).
10.14
In an experiment on the specific heat of a metal, a 0.20 kg block of the metal at
150 °C is dropped in a copper calorimeter (of water equivalent 0.025 kg) containing
150 cm3 of water at 27 °C. The final temperature is 40 °C. Compute the specific heat
of the metal. If heat losses to the surroundings are not negligible, is your answer
greater or smaller than the actual value for specific heat of the metal ?
10.15
Given below are observations on molar specific heats at room temperature of some
common gases.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 03 - Page 24 :
 THERMAL PROPERTIES OF MATTER
225
Gas
Molar specific heat (Cv )
(cal mo1–1 K–1)
Hydrogen
4.87
Nitrogen
4.97
Oxygen
5.02
Nitric oxide
4.99
Carbon monoxide
5.01
Chlorine
6.17
The measured molar specific heats of these gases are markedly different from
those for monatomic gases.  Typically, molar specific heat of a monatomic gas is
2.92 cal/mol K.  Explain this difference.  What can you infer from the somewhat
larger (than the rest) value for  chlorine ?
10.16
A child running a temperature of 101°F is given an antipyrin (i.e. a medicine that
lowers fever) which causes an increase in the rate of evaporation of sweat from his
body. If the fever is brought down to 98 °F in 20 minutes, what is the average rate
of extra evaporation caused, by the drug. Assume the evaporation mechanism to
be the only way by which heat is lost.  The mass of the child is 30 kg.  The specific
heat of human body is approximately the same as that of water, and latent heat of
evaporation of water at that temperature is about 580 cal g–1.
10.17
A ‘thermacole’ icebox is a cheap and an efficient method for storing small quantities
of cooked food in summer in particular. A cubical icebox of side 30 cm has a
thickness of 5.0 cm. If 4.0 kg of ice is put in the box, estimate the amount of ice
remaining after 6 h. The outside temperature is 45 °C, and co-efficient of thermal
conductivity of thermacole is 0.01 J s–1 m–1 K–1. [Heat of fusion of water = 335 × 103
J kg–1]
10.18
A brass boiler has a base area of 0.15 m2 and thickness 1.0 cm.  It boils water at the
rate of 6.0 kg/min when placed on a gas stove.  Estimate the temperature of the part
of the flame in contact with the boiler.  Thermal conductivity of brass = 109 J s–1 m–1
K–1 ;  Heat of vaporisation of water =  2256 × 103 J kg–1.
10.19
Explain why :
(a)
a body with large reflectivity is a poor emitter
(b)
a brass tumbler feels much colder than a wooden tray on a chilly day
(c)
an optical pyrometer (for measuring high temperatures) calibrated for an ideal
black body radiation gives too low a value for the temperature of a red hot
iron piece in the open, but gives a correct value for the temperature when the
same piece is  in the furnace
(d)
 the earth without its atmosphere would be inhospitably cold
(e)
heating systems based on circulation of  steam are more efficient in warming
a building than those based on circulation of hot water
10.20
A body cools from 80 °C to 50 °C in 5 minutes. Calculate the time it takes to cool
from 60 °C to 30 °C. The temperature of the surroundings is 20 °C.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 1 :
 CHAPTER ELEVEN
THERMODYNAMICS
11.1  INTRODUCTION
In previous chapter we have studied thermal properties of
matter. In this chapter we shall study laws that govern
thermal energy. We shall study the processes where work is
converted into heat and vice versa. In winter, when we rub
our palms together, we feel warmer; here work done in rubbing
produces the  ‘heat’.  Conversely, in a steam engine, the ‘heat’
of the steam is used to do useful work in moving the pistons,
which in turn rotate the wheels of the train.
In physics, we need to define the notions of heat,
temperature, work, etc. more carefully.  Historically, it took a
long time to arrive at the proper concept of ‘heat’. Before the
modern picture, heat was regarded as a fine invisible fluid
filling in the pores of a substance.  On contact between a hot
body and a cold body, the fluid  (called caloric) flowed from
the colder to the hotter body ! This is similar to what happens
when a horizontal pipe connects two tanks containing water
up to different heights. The flow continues until the levels of
water in the two tanks are the same.  Likewise, in the ‘caloric’
picture of heat, heat flows until the ‘caloric levels’ (i.e., the
temperatures) equalise.
In time, the picture of heat as a fluid was discarded in
favour of the modern concept of heat as a form of energy. An
important experiment in this connection was due to Benjamin
Thomson (also known as Count Rumford) in 1798. He
observed that boring of a brass cannon generated a lot of
heat, indeed enough to boil water. More significantly, the
amount of heat produced depended on the work done (by the
horses employed for turning the drill) but not on the
sharpness of the drill. In the caloric picture, a sharper drill
would scoop out more heat fluid from the pores; but this
was not observed. A most natural explanation of the
observations was that heat was a form of energy and the
experiment demonstrated conversion of energy from one form
to another–from work to heat.
11.1
Introduction
11.2
Thermal equilibrium
11.3
Zeroth law of
Thermodynamics
11.4
Heat, internal energy and
work
11.5
First law of
thermodynamics
11.6
Specific heat capacity
11.7
Thermodynamic state
variables and equation of
state
11.8
Thermodynamic processes
11.9
Second law of
thermodynamics
11.10 Reversible and irreversible
processes
11.11 Carnot engine
Summary
Points to ponder
Exercises
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 2 :
 THERMODYNAMICS
227
Thermodynamics is the branch of physics that
deals with the concepts of heat and temperature
and the inter-conversion of heat and other forms
of energy. Thermodynamics is a macroscopic
science. It deals with bulk systems and does not
go into the molecular constitution of matter. In
fact, its concepts and laws were formulated in the
nineteenth century before the molecular picture
of matter was firmly established.  Thermodynamic
description involves relatively few macroscopic
variables of the system, which are suggested by
common sense and can be usually measured
directly. A microscopic description of a gas, for
example, would involve specifying the co-ordinates
and velocities of the huge number of molecules
constituting the gas. The description in kinetic
theory of gases is not so detailed but it does involve
molecular 
distribution 
of 
velocities.
Thermodynamic description of a gas, on the other
hand, avoids the molecular description altogether.
Instead, the state of a gas in thermodynamics is
specified by macroscopic variables such as
pressure, volume, temperature, mass and
composition that  are felt by our sense perceptions
and are measurable*.
The distinction between mechanics and
thermodynamics is worth bearing in mind.  In
mechanics, our interest is in the motion of particles
or bodies under the action of forces and torques.
Thermodynamics is not concerned with the
motion of the system as a whole.  It is concerned
with the internal macroscopic state of the body.
When a bullet is fired from a gun, what changes
is the mechanical state of the bullet (its kinetic
energy, in particular), not its temperature.  When
the bullet pierces a wood and stops, the kinetic
energy of the bullet gets converted into heat,
changing the temperature of the bullet and the
surrounding layers of wood.  Temperature is
related to the energy of the internal (disordered)
motion of the bullet, not to the motion of the bullet
as a whole.
11.2  THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM
Equilibrium in mechanics means that the net
external force and torque on a system are zero.
The term ‘equilibrium’ in thermodynamics appears
in a different context : we say the state of a system
is an equilibrium state if the macroscopic
variables that characterise the system do not
change in time. For example, a gas inside a closed
rigid container, completely insulated from its
surroundings, with fixed values of pressure,
volume, temperature, mass and composition that
do not change with time, is in a state of
thermodynamic equilibrium.
Fig. 11.1
(a) Systems A and B (two gases) separated
by an adiabatic wall – an insulating wall
that does not allow flow of heat. (b) The
same systems A and B separated by a
diathermic wall – a conducting wall that
allows heat to flow from one to another.  In
this case, thermal equilibrium is attained
in due course.
In general, whether or not a system is in a state
of equilibrium depends on the surroundings and
the nature of the wall that separates the system
from the surroundings.  Consider two gases A and
B occupying two different containers. We know
experimentally that pressure and volume of a
given mass of gas can be chosen to be its two
independent variables. Let the pressure and
volume of the gases be (PA, VA) and (PB, VB)
respectively.  Suppose first that the two systems
are put in proximity but are separated by an
(a)
(b)
*
Thermodynamics may also involve other variables that are not so obvious to our senses  e.g. entropy, enthalpy,
etc., and they are all macroscopic variables. However, a thermodynamic state is specified by five state
variables viz., pressure, volume, temperature, internal energy and entropy. Entropy is a measure of disorderness
in the system. Enthalpy is a measure of total heat content of the system.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 3 :
 PHYSICS
228
adiabatic wall – an insulating wall (can be
movable) that does not allow flow of energy (heat)
from one to another. The systems are insulated
from the rest of the surroundings also by similar
adiabatic walls. The situation is shown
schematically in Fig. 11.1 (a). In this case, it is
found that any possible pair of values (PA, VA) will
be in equilibrium with any possible pair of values
(PB, VB).  Next, suppose that the adiabatic wall is
replaced by a diathermic wall – a conducting wall
that allows energy flow (heat) from one to another.
It is then found that the macroscopic variables of
the systems A and B change spontaneously until
both the systems attain equilibrium states. After
that there is no change in their states. The
situation is shown in Fig. 11.1(b).  The pressure
and volume variables of the two gases change to
(PB ′, VB ′) and (PA ′, VA ′) such that the new states
of A and B are in equilibrium with each other*.
There is no more energy flow from one to another.
We then say that the system A is in thermal
equilibrium with the system B.
What characterises the situation of thermal
equilibrium between two systems ? You can guess
the answer from your experience. In thermal
equilibrium, the temperatures of the two systems
are equal. We shall see how does one arrive at the
concept of temperature in thermodynamics? The
Zeroth law of thermodynamics provides the clue.
11.3  ZEROTH LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
Imagine two systems A and B, separated by an
adiabatic wall, while each is in contact with a third
system C, via a conducting wall [Fig. 11.2(a)]. The
states of the systems (i.e., their macroscopic
variables) will change until both A and B come to
thermal equilibrium with C. After this is achieved,
suppose that the adiabatic wall between A and B
is replaced by a conducting wall and C is insulated
from A and B by an adiabatic wall [Fig.11.2(b)]. It
is found that the states of A and B change no
further i.e. they are found to be in thermal
equilibrium with each other. This observation
forms the basis of the Zeroth Law of
Thermodynamics, which states that ‘two
systems in thermal equilibrium with a third
system separately are in thermal equilibrium
with each other’.  R.H. Fowler formulated this
law in 1931 long after the first and second Laws
of thermodynamics were stated and so numbered.
The Zeroth Law clearly suggests that when two
systems A and B, are in thermal equilibrium,
there must be a physical quantity that has the
same value for both. This thermodynamic
variable whose value is equal for two systems in
thermal equilibrium is called temperature (T ).
Thus, if A and B are separately in equilibrium
with C, TA = TC  and TB = TC.  This implies that
TA = TB i.e. the systems A and B are also in
thermal equilibrium.
We have arrived at the concept of temperature
formally via the Zeroth Law.  The next question
is : how to assign numerical values to
temperatures of different bodies ?  In other words,
how do we construct a scale of temperature ?
Thermometry deals with this basic question to
which we turn in the next section.
Fig. 11.2
(a) Systems A and B are separated by an
adiabatic wall, while each is in contact
with a third system C via a conducting
wall. (b) The adiabatic wall between  A
and B is replaced by a conducting wall,
while C is insulated from A and B by an
adiabatic wall.
*
Both the variables need not change. It depends on the constraints. For instance, if the gases are in containers
of fixed volume, only the pressures of the gases would change to achieve thermal equilibrium.
(a)
(b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 4 :
 THERMODYNAMICS
229
11.4  HEAT, INTERNAL ENERGY AND WORK
The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics led us to
the concept of temperature that agrees with our
commonsense notion.  Temperature is a marker
of the ‘hotness’ of a body. It determines the
direction of flow of heat when two bodies are
placed in thermal contact.  Heat flows from the
body at a higher temperature to the one at lower
temperature. The flow stops when the
temperatures equalise; the two bodies are then
in thermal equilibrium. We saw in some detail
how to construct temperature scales to assign
temperatures to different bodies. We now
describe the concepts of heat and other relevant
quantities like internal energy and work.
The concept of internal energy of a system is
not difficult to understand.  We know that every
bulk system consists of a large number of
molecules.  Internal energy is simply the sum of
the kinetic energies and potential energies of
these molecules. We remarked earlier that in
thermodynamics, the kinetic energy of the
system, as a whole, is not relevant.  Internal
energy is thus, the sum of molecular kinetic and
potential energies in the frame of reference
relative to which the centre of mass of the system
is at rest. Thus, it includes only the (disordered)
energy associated with the random motion of
molecules of the system. We denote the internal
energy of a system by U.
Though we have invoked the molecular
picture to understand the meaning of internal
energy, as far as thermodynamics is concerned,
U is simply a macroscopic variable of the system.
The important thing about internal energy is
that it depends only on the state of the system,
not on how that state was achieved.  Internal
energy U of a system is an example of a
thermodynamic ‘state variable’ – its value
depends only on the given state of the system,
not on history i.e. not on the ‘path’ taken to arrive
at that state. Thus, the internal energy of a given
mass of gas depends on its state described by
specific values of pressure, volume and
temperature. It does not depend on how this
state of the gas came about. Pressure, volume,
temperature, and internal energy are
thermodynamic state variables of the system
(gas) (see section 11.7). If we neglect the small
intermolecular forces in a gas, the internal
energy of a gas is just the sum of kinetic energies
associated with various random motions of its
molecules.  We will see in the next chapter that
in a gas this motion is not only translational
(i.e. motion from one point to another in the
volume of the container); it also includes
rotational and vibrational motion of the
molecules (Fig. 11.3).
Fig. 11.3 (a) Internal energy U of a gas is the sum
of the kinetic and potential energies of  its
molecules when the box is at rest. Kinetic
energy due to various types of motion
(translational, rotational, vibrational) is to
be included in U.  (b) If the same box is
moving as a whole with some velocity,
the kinetic energy of the box is not to be
included in U.
Fig. 11.4 Heat and work are two distinct modes of
energy transfer to a system that results  in
change in its internal energy. (a) Heat is
energy transfer due to temperature
difference between the system and the
surroundings.  (b) Work is energy transfer
brought about by means (e.g. moving the
piston by raising or lowering some weight
connected to it) that do not involve such a
temperature difference.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 5 :
 PHYSICS
230
What are the ways of changing internal
energy of a system ? Consider again, for
simplicity, the system to be a certain mass of
gas contained in a cylinder with a movable
piston as shown in Fig. 11.4.  Experience shows
there are two ways of changing the state of the
gas (and hence its internal energy).  One way is
to put the cylinder in contact with a body at a
higher temperature than that of the gas. The
temperature difference will cause a flow of
energy (heat) from the hotter body to the gas,
thus increasing the internal energy of the gas.
The other way is to push the piston down i.e. to
do work on the system, which again results in
increasing the internal energy of the gas.  Of
course, both these things could happen in the
reverse direction. With surroundings at a lower
temperature, heat would flow from the gas to
the surroundings.  Likewise, the gas could push
the piston up and do work on the surroundings.
In short, heat and work are two different modes
of altering the state of a thermodynamic system
and changing its internal energy.
The notion of heat should be carefully
distinguished from the notion of internal energy.
Heat is certainly energy, but it is the energy in
transit.  This is not just a play of words.  The
distinction is of basic significance. The state of
a thermodynamic system is characterised by its
internal energy, not heat. A statement like ‘a
gas in a given state has a certain amount of
heat’ is as meaningless as the statement that
‘a gas in a given state has a certain amount
of work’.  In contrast, ‘a gas in a given state
has a certain amount of internal energy’ is a
perfectly meaningful statement. Similarly, the
statements ‘a certain amount of heat is
supplied to the system’ or ‘a certain amount
of work was done by the system’ are perfectly
meaningful.
To summarise, heat and work in
thermodynamics are not state variables. They
are modes of energy transfer to a system
resulting in change in its internal energy,
which, as already mentioned, is a state variable.
In ordinary language, we often confuse heat
with internal energy.  The distinction between
them is sometimes ignored in elementary
physics books. For proper understanding of
thermodynamics, however, the distinction is
crucial.
11.5  FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
We have seen that the internal energy U of a
system can change through two modes of energy
transfer : heat and work.  Let
∆Q
= Heat supplied to the system by the
surroundings
∆W
= Work done by the system on the
surroundings
∆U
= Change in internal energy of the system
The general principle of conservation of
energy then implies that
∆Q
=  ∆U + ∆W
(11.1)
i.e. the energy (∆Q) supplied to the system goes
in partly to increase the internal energy of the
system (∆U) and the rest in work on the
environment (∆W). Equation (11.1) is known as
the First Law of Thermodynamics.  It is simply
the general law of conservation of energy applied
to any system in which the energy transfer from
or to the surroundings is taken into account.
Let us put Eq. (11.1) in the alternative form
∆Q  – ∆W  = ∆U
(11.2)
Now, the system may go from an initial state
to the final state in a number of ways. For
example, to change the state of a gas from
(P1, V1) to (P2, V2), we can first change the
volume of the gas from V1 to V2, keeping its
pressure constant i.e. we can first go the state
(P1, V2) and then change the pressure of the
gas from P1 to P2, keeping volume constant, to
take the gas to (P2, V2).  Alternatively, we can
first keep the volume constant and then keep
the pressure constant. Since U is a state
variable, ∆U depends only on the initial and
final states and not on the path taken by the
gas to go from one to the other. However, ∆Q
and ∆W will, in general, depend on the path
taken to go from the initial to final states. From
the First Law of Thermodynamics, Eq. (11.2),
it is clear that the combination ∆Q – ∆W, is
however, path independent. This shows that
if a system is taken through a process in which
∆U = 0 (for example, isothermal expansion of
an ideal gas, see section 11.8),
∆Q  = ∆W
i.e., heat supplied to the system is used up
entirely by the system in doing work on the
environment.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 6 :
 THERMODYNAMICS
231
If the system is a gas in a cylinder with a
movable piston, the gas in moving the piston does
work. Since force is pressure times area, and
area times displacement is volume, work done
by the system against a constant pressure P is
∆W  = P ∆V
where ∆V is the change in volume of the gas.
Thus, for this case, Eq. (11.1) gives
∆Q  = ∆U + P ∆V
(11.3)
As an application of Eq. (11.3), consider the
change in internal energy for 1 g of water when
we go from its liquid to vapour phase. The
measured latent heat of water is 2256 J/g. i.e.,
for 1 g of water ∆Q = 2256 J. At atmospheric
pressure, 1 g of water has a volume 1 cm3 in
liquid phase and 1671 cm3 in vapour phase.
Therefore,
∆W =P (Vg –Vl ) = 1.013 ×105 × (1671 × 10–6) =169.2 J
Equation (11.3) then gives
∆U = 2256 – 169.2  =  2086.8 J
We see that most of the heat goes to increase
the internal energy of water in transition from
the liquid to the vapour phase.
11.6  SPECIFIC HEAT CAPACITY
Suppose an amount of heat ∆Q supplied to a
substance changes its temperature from T to
T + ∆T.  We define heat capacity of a substance
(see Chapter 10) to be
T
Q
S
∆
∆
= 
 
(11.4)
We expect ∆Q and, therefore, heat capacity S
to be proportional to the mass of the substance.
Further, it could also depend on the
temperature, i.e., a different amount of heat may
be needed for a unit rise in temperature at
different temperatures. To define a constant
characteristic of the substance and
independent of its amount, we divide S by the
mass of the substance m  in kg :
s
S
m
m
Q
T
 
 
 
 
=
=




1
∆
∆
(11.5)
s is known as the specific heat capacity of the
substance. It depends on the nature of the
substance and its temperature. The unit of
specific heat capacity is J kg–1 K–1.
If the amount of substance is specified in
terms of moles µ (instead of mass m in kg ), we
can define heat capacity per mole of the
substance by
1
S
Q
C
T
µ
µ
∆
=
=
∆
(11.6)
C is known as molar specific heat capacity of
the substance. Like s, C is independent of the
amount of substance. C depends on the nature
of the substance, its temperature and the
conditions under which heat is supplied. The
unit of C is J mo1–1 K–1. As we shall see later (in
connection with specific heat capacity of gases),
additional conditions may be needed to define
C or s. The idea in defining C is that simple
predictions can be made in regard to molar
specific heat capacities.
Table 11.1 lists measured specific and molar
heat capacities of solids at atmospheric pressure
and ordinary room temperature.
We will see in Chapter 12 that predictions of
specific heats of gases generally agree with
experiment. We can use the same law of
equipartition of energy that we use there to
predict molar specific heat capacities of solids
(See Section 12.5 and 12.6).  Consider a solid of
N atoms, each vibrating about its mean
position. An oscillator in one dimension has
average energy of 2 × ½ kBT = kBT. In three
dimensions, the average energy is 3 kBT.
For a mole of a solid, the total energy is
U  = 3 kBT  × NA  = 3 RT  (∵kBT  × NA = R)
Now, at constant pressure, ∆Q = ∆U + P ∆V ≅
∆U,  since for a solid ∆V is negligible.  Therefore,
C
Q
T
U
T
R
=
=
=
∆
∆
∆
∆
3
(11.7)
Table 11.1
Specific and molar heat capacities
of 
some 
solids 
at 
room
temperature and atmospheric
pressure
   As Table 11.1 shows, the experimentally
measured values which generally agrees with
Substance
Speci"c
heat
–v
(J kg
K )
–1
–1
Molar speci"c
heat (J mol
K )
–1
–1
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 7 :
 PHYSICS
232
predicted value 3R at ordinary temperatures.
(Carbon is an exception.) The agreement is
known to break down at low temperatures.
Specific heat capacity of water
The old unit of heat was calorie.  One calorie
was earlier defined to be the amount of heat
required to raise the temperature of 1g of water
by 1°C. With more precise measurements, it was
found that the specific heat of water varies
slightly with temperature.  Figure 11.5 shows
this variation in the temperature range 0 to
100 °C.
Fig. 11.5
Variation of specific heat capacity of
water with temperature.
For a precise definition of calorie, it was,
therefore, necessary to specify the unit
temperature interval. One calorie is defined
to be the amount of heat required to raise the
temperature of 1g of water from 14.5 °C to
15.5 °C. Since heat is just a form of energy,
it is preferable to use the unit joule, J.
In SI units, the specific heat capacity of water
is 4186 J kg–1 K–1 i.e. 4.186 J g–1 K–1. The so
called mechanical equivalent of heat defined
as the amount of work needed to produce
1 cal of heat is in fact just a conversion factor
between two different units of energy : calorie
to joule. Since in SI units, we use the unit joule
for heat, work or any other form of energy, the
term mechanical equivalent is now
superfluous and need not be used.
As already remarked, the specific heat
capacity depends on the process or the
conditions under which heat capacity transfer
takes place.  For gases, for example, we can
define two specific heats : specific heat
capacity at constant volume and specific
heat capacity at constant pressure.  For an
ideal gas, we have a simple relation.
        Cp  –  Cv = R
(11.8)
where Cp and Cv  are molar specific heat
capacities of an ideal gas at constant pressure
and volume respectively and R is the universal
gas constant.  To prove the relation, we begin
with Eq. (11.3) for 1 mole of the gas :
                ∆Q  = ∆U + P ∆V
If ∆Q  is absorbed at constant volume, ∆V = 0
   C
Q
T
U
T
U
T
v
v
v
= 



= 



= 



∆
∆
∆
∆
∆
∆
(11.9)
where the subscript v is dropped in the last
step, since U of an ideal gas depends only on
temperature. (The subscript denotes the
quantity kept fixed.) If, on the other hand, ∆Q
is absorbed at constant pressure,
C
Q
T
U
T
 P
V
T
p
p
p
p
 
 
 
=




=




+




∆
∆
∆
∆
∆
∆
(11.10)
The subscript p can be dropped from the
first term since U of an ideal gas depends only
on T.  Now, for a mole of an ideal gas
                PV = RT
which gives
    P
V
T
R
 
 
p
∆
∆




=
(11.11)
Equations (11.9) to (11.11) give the desired
relation, Eq. (11.8).
11.7THERMODYNAMIC STATE VARIABLES
AND EQUATION OF STATE
Every equilibrium state of a thermodynamic
system is completely described by specific
values of some macroscopic variables, also
called state variables. For example, an
equilibrium state of a gas is completely
specified by the values of pressure, volume,
temperature, and mass (and composition if
there is a mixture of gases). A thermodynamic
system is not always in equilibrium. For example,
a gas allowed to expand freely  against vacuum
is not an equilibrium state [Fig. 11.6(a)]. During
the rapid expansion, pressure of the gas may
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 8 :
 THERMODYNAMICS
233
not be uniform throughout. Similarly, a mixture
of gases undergoing an explosive chemical
reaction (e.g. a mixture of petrol vapour and
air when ignited by a spark) is not an
equilibrium state; again its temperature and
pressure are not uniform [Fig. 11.6(b)].
Eventually, the gas attains a uniform
temperature and pressure and comes to
thermal and mechanical equilibrium with its
surroundings.
Fig. 11.6 (a) The partition in the box is suddenly
removed leading to free expansion of the
gas. (b) A mixture of gases undergoing an
explosive chemical reaction. In both
situations, the gas is not in equilibrium and
cannot be described by state variables.
In short, thermodynamic state variables
describe equilibrium states of systems. The
various state variables are not necessarily
independent. The connection between the state
variables is called the equation of state. For
example, for an ideal gas, the equation of state
is the ideal gas relation
   P V = µ R T
For a fixed amount of the gas i.e. given µ, there
are thus, only two independent variables, say P
and V or T and V.  The pressure-volume curve
for a fixed temperature is called an isotherm.
Real gases may have more complicated
equations of state.
The thermodynamic state variables are of two
kinds: extensive and intensive. Extensive
variables indicate the ‘size’ of the system.
Intensive variables such as pressure and
temperature do not. To decide which variable is
extensive and which intensive, think of a
relevant system in equilibrium, and imagine that
it is divided into two equal parts. The variables
that remain unchanged for each part are
intensive. The variables whose values get halved
in each part are extensive. It is easily seen, for
example, that internal energy U, volume V, total
mass M are extensive variables. Pressure P,
temperature T, and density ρ are intensive
variables.  It is a good practice to check the
consistency of thermodynamic equations using
this classification of variables. For example, in
the equation
      ∆Q = ∆U + P ∆V
quantities on both sides are extensive*. (The
product of an intensive variable like P and an
extensive quantity ∆V is extensive.)
11.8  THERMODYNAMIC PROCESSES
11.8.1  Quasi-static process
Consider a gas in thermal and mechanical
equilibrium with its surroundings. The pressure
of the gas in that case equals the external
pressure and its temperature is the same as
that of its surroundings. Suppose that the
external pressure is suddenly reduced (say by
lifting the weight on the movable piston in the
container).  The piston will accelerate outward.
During the process, the gas passes through
states that are not equilibrium states. The non-
equilibrium states do not have well-defined
pressure and temperature. In the same way, if
a finite temperature difference exists between
the gas and its surroundings, there will be a
rapid exchange of heat during which the gas
will pass through non-equilibrium states.  In
due course, the gas will settle to an equilibrium
state with well-defined temperature and
pressure equal to those of the surroundings. The
free expansion of a gas in vacuum and a mixture
of gases undergoing an explosive chemical
reaction, mentioned in section 11.7 are also
examples where the system goes through non-
equilibrium states.
Non-equilibrium states of a system are difficult
to deal with.  It is, therefore, convenient to
imagine an idealised process in which at every
stage the system is an equilibrium state. Such a
* As emphasised earlier, Q is not a state variable.  However, ∆Q is clearly proportional to the total mass of
system and hence is extensive.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 9 :
 PHYSICS
234
process is, in principle, infinitely slow, hence the
name quasi-static (meaning nearly static). The
system changes its variables (P, T, V ) so slowly
that it remains in thermal and mechanical
equilibrium with its surroundings throughout.
In a quasi-static process, at every stage, the
difference in the pressure of the system and the
external pressure is infinitesimally small.  The
same is true of the temperature difference
between the system and its surroundings
(Fig.11.7).  To take a gas from the state (P, T ) to
another state (P ′, T ′ ) via  a quasi-static process,
we change the external pressure by a very small
amount, allow the system to equalise its pressure
with that of the surroundings and continue the
process infinitely slowly until the system
achieves the pressure P ′. Similarly, to change
the temperature, we introduce an infinitesimal
temperature difference between the system and
the surrounding reservoirs and by choosing
reservoirs of progressively different temperatures
T to T ′, the system achieves the temperature T ′.
Fig. 11.7
In a quasi-static process, the temperature
of the surrounding reservoir and the
external pressure differ only infinitesimally
from the temperature and pressure of the
system.
A quasi-static process is obviously a
hypothetical construct.  In practice, processes
that are sufficiently slow and do not involve
accelerated motion of the piston, large
temperature gradient, etc., are reasonably
approximation to an ideal quasi-static process.
We shall from now on deal with quasi-static
processes only, except when stated otherwise.
A process in which the temperature of the
system is kept fixed throughout is called an
isothermal process.  The expansion of a gas in
a metallic cylinder placed in a large reservoir of
fixed temperature is an example of an isothermal
process.  (Heat transferred from the reservoir to
the system does not materially affect the
temperature of the reservoir, because of its very
large heat capacity.)  In isobaric processes the
pressure is constant while in isochoric
processes the volume is constant. Finally, if the
system is insulated from the surroundings and
no heat flows between the system and the
surroundings, the process is adiabatic. The
definitions of these special processes are
summarised in Table. 11.2
Table 11.2
Some special thermodynamic
processes
We now consider these processes in some detail :
11.8.2 Isothermal process
For an isothermal process (T fixed), the ideal gas
equation gives
                  PV  =  constant
i.e., pressure of a given mass of gas varies inversely
as its volume. This is nothing but Boyle’s Law.
Suppose an ideal gas goes isothermally (at
temperature T ) from its initial state (P1, V1) to
the final state (P2, V 2).  At any intermediate stage
with pressure P and volume change from V to
V + ∆V (∆V small)
     ∆W  = P ∆ V
Taking (∆V → 0) and summing the quantity
∆W over the entire process,
W = 
P
V
V
V
1
2
 d
∫
=  RT
V
V
RT   
 V
V
V
V
1
2
2
1
µ
µ
d
∫
=
    
In
(11.12)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 10 :
 THERMODYNAMICS
235
where in the second  step we have made use of
the ideal gas equation PV = µ RT and  taken the
constants out of the integral.  For an ideal gas,
internal energy depends only on temperature.
Thus, there is no change in the internal energy
of an ideal gas in an isothermal process. The
First Law of Thermodynamics then implies that
heat supplied to the gas equals the work done
by the gas : Q = W.  Note from Eq. (11.12) that
for V2 > V1,  W > 0; and for V2 < V1, W < 0.  That
is, in an isothermal expansion, the gas absorbs
heat and does work while in an isothermal
compression, work is  done on the gas by the
environment and heat is released.
11.8.3 Adiabatic process
In an adiabatic process, the system is insulated
from the surroundings and heat absorbed or
released is zero. From Eq. (11.1), we see that
work done by the gas results in decrease in its
internal energy (and hence its temperature for
an ideal gas).  We quote without proof (the result
that you will learn in higher courses) that for
an adiabatic process of an ideal gas.
    P V γ   =  const
(11.13)
where γ  is the ratio of specific heats (ordinary
or molar) at constant pressure and at constant
volume.
               γ =
Cp
Cv
Thus if an ideal gas undergoes a change in
its state adiabatically from (P1, V1) to (P2, V2) :
P1 V1
γ  = P2 V2
γ
(11.14)
Figure11.8 shows the P-V curves of an ideal
gas for two adiabatic processes connecting two
isotherms.
Fig. 11.8
P-V curves for isothermal and adiabatic
processes of an ideal gas.
We can calculate, as before, the work done in
an adiabatic change of an ideal gas from the
state (P1, V1, T1) to the state (P2, V2, T2).
         W =
P
V
V
V
 
 d
1
2
∫
(11.15)
From Eq. (11.14), the constant is P1V1
γ  or P2V2
γ
W = 
P V
V
P V
V
 
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1  
−
−
−
−






γ
γ
γ
γ
γ
1
1
 = 
P V
P V
R(T
T
1
1  
−
−
−
−
[
] =
γ
µ
γ
2
2
1
1
1
2 )
1
(11.16)
As expected, if work is done by the gas in an
adiabatic process (W > 0), from Eq. (11.16),
T2 < T1.  On the other hand, if work is done on
the gas (W < 0), we get T2 > T1 i.e., the
temperature of the gas rises.
11.8.4 Isochoric process
In an isochoric process, V is constant. No work
is done on or by the gas.  From Eq. (11.1), the
heat absorbed by the gas goes entirely to change
its internal energy and its temperature. The
change in temperature for a given amount of
heat is determined by the specific heat of the
gas at constant volume.
11.8.5 Isobaric process
In an isobaric process, P is fixed. Work done by
the gas is
W = P (V2 – V1)  =  µ R (T2 – T1)
   (11.17)
Since temperature changes, so does internal
energy. The heat absorbed goes partly to
increase internal energy and partly to do work.
The change in temperature for a given amount
of heat is determined by the specific heat of the
gas at constant pressure.
11.8.6 Cyclic process
In a cyclic process, the system returns to its
initial state. Since internal energy is a state
variable, ∆U = 0 for a cyclic process. From
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 11 :
 PHYSICS
236
Eq. (11.1), the total heat absorbed equals the
work done by the system.
11.9  SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
The First Law of Thermodynamics is the
principle of conservation of energy.  Common
experience shows that there are many
conceivable processes that are perfectly
allowed by the First Law and yet are never
observed.  For example, nobody has ever seen
a book lying on a table jumping to a height by
itself.  But such a thing would be possible if
the principle of conservation of energy were
the only restriction. The table could cool
spontaneously, converting some of its internal
energy into an equal amount of mechanical
energy of the book, which would then hop to a
height with potential energy equal to the
mechanical energy it acquired.  But this never
happens. Clearly, some additional basic
principle of nature forbids the above, even
though it satisfies the energy conservation
principle.  This principle, which disallows
many phenomena consistent with the First
Law of Thermodynamics is known as the
Second Law of Thermodynamics.
The Second Law of Thermodynamics gives
a fundamental limitation to the efficiency of a
heat engine and the co-efficient of
performance of a refrigerator. In simple terms,
it says that efficiency of a heat engine can
never be unity. For a refrigerator, the Second
Law says that the co-efficient of performance
can never be infinite.  The following two
statements, one due to Kelvin and Planck
denying the possibility of a perfect heat engine,
and another due to Clausius denying the
possibility of a perfect refrigerator or heat
pump, are a concise summary of these
observations.
Kelvin-Planck statement
No process is possible whose sole result is the
absorption of heat from a reservoir and the
complete conversion of the heat into work.
Clausius statement
No process is possible whose sole result is the
transfer of heat from a colder object to a
hotter object.
It can be proved that the two statements
above are completely equivalent.
11.10  REVERSIBLE AND IRREVERSIBLE
PROCESSES
Imagine some process in which a thermodynamic
system goes from an initial state i to a final state
f. During the process the system absorbs heat Q
from the surroundings and performs work W on
it. Can we reverse this process and bring both
the system and surroundings to their initial
states with no other effect anywhere ? Experience
suggests that for most processes in nature this
is not possible. The spontaneous processes of
nature are irreversible. Several examples can be
cited. The base of a vessel on an oven is hotter
than its other parts. When the vessel is removed,
heat is transferred from the base to the other
parts, bringing the vessel to a uniform
temperature (which in due course cools to the
temperature of the surroundings). The process
cannot be reversed; a part of the vessel will not
get cooler spontaneously and warm up the base.
It will violate the Second Law of Thermodynamics,
if it did. The free expansion of a gas is irreversible.
The combustion reaction of a mixture of petrol
and air ignited by a spark cannot be reversed.
Cooking gas leaking from a gas cylinder in the
kitchen diffuses to the entire room. The diffusion
process will not spontaneously reverse and bring
the gas back to the cylinder. The stirring of a
liquid in thermal contact with a reservoir will
convert the work done into heat, increasing the
internal energy of the reservoir. The process
cannot be reversed exactly; otherwise it would
amount to conversion of heat entirely into work,
violating the Second Law of Thermodynamics.
Irreversibility is a rule rather an exception
in nature.
Irreversibility arises mainly from two causes:
one, many processes (like a free expansion, or
an explosive chemical reaction) take the system
to non-equilibrium states; two, most processes
involve friction, viscosity and other dissipative
effects (e.g., a moving body coming to a stop and
losing its mechanical energy as heat to the floor
and the body; a rotating blade in a liquid coming
to a stop due to viscosity and losing its
mechanical energy with corresponding gain in
the internal energy  of the liquid). Since
dissipative effects are present everywhere and
can be minimised but not fully eliminated, most
processes that we deal with are irreversible.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 12 :
 THERMODYNAMICS
237
A thermodynamic process  (state i → state f )
is reversible if the process can be turned back
such that both the system and the surroundings
return to their original states, with no other
change anywhere else in the universe. From the
preceding discussion, a reversible process is an
idealised notion. A process is reversible only if
it is quasi-static (system in equilibrium with the
surroundings at every stage) and there are no
dissipative effects. For example, a quasi-static
isothermal expansion of an ideal gas in a
cylinder fitted with a frictionless movable piston
is a reversible process.
Why is reversibility such a basic concept in
thermodynamics ?  As we have seen, one of the
concerns of thermodynamics is the efficiency
with which heat can be converted into work.
The Second Law of Thermodynamics rules out
the possibility of a perfect heat engine with 100%
efficiency. But what is the highest efficiency
possible for a heat engine working between two
reservoirs at temperatures T1 and T2? It turns
out that a heat engine based on idealised
reversible processes achieves the highest
efficiency possible. All other engines involving
irreversibility in any way (as would be the case
for practical engines) have lower than this
limiting efficiency.
11.11  CARNOT ENGINE
Suppose we have a hot reservoir at temperature
T1 and a cold reservoir at temperature T2.  What
is the maximum efficiency possible for a heat
engine operating between the two reservoirs and
what cycle of processes should be adopted to
achieve the maximum efficiency ?  Sadi Carnot,
a French engineer, first considered this question
in 1824. Interestingly, Carnot arrived at the
correct answer, even though the basic concepts
of heat and thermodynamics had yet to be firmly
established.
We expect the ideal engine operating between
two temperatures to be a reversible engine.
Irreversibility is associated with dissipative
effects, as remarked in the preceding section,
and lowers efficiency. A process is reversible if
it is quasi-static and non-dissipative.  We have
seen that a process is not quasi-static if it
involves finite temperature difference between
the system and the reservoir.  This implies that
in a reversible heat engine operating between
two temperatures, heat should be absorbed
(from the hot reservoir) isothermally and
released (to the cold reservoir) isothermally.  We
thus have identified two steps of the reversible
heat engine : isothermal process at temperature
T1 absorbing heat Q1 from the hot reservoir, and
another isothermal process at temperature T2
releasing heat Q2 to the cold reservoir. To
complete a cycle, we need to take the system
from temperature T1 to T2 and then back from
temperature T2 to T1.  Which processes should
we employ for this purpose that are reversible?
A little reflection shows that we can only adopt
reversible adiabatic processes for these
purposes, which involve no heat flow from any
reservoir. If we employ any other process that is
not adiabatic, say an isochoric process, to take
the system from one temperature to another, we
shall need a series of reservoirs in the
temperature range T2 to T1 to ensure that at each
stage the process is quasi-static.  (Remember
again that for a process to be quasi-static and
reversible, there should be no finite temperature
difference between the system and the reservoir.)
But we are considering a reversible engine that
operates between only two temperatures. Thus
adiabatic processes must bring about the
temperature change in the system from T1 to T2
and T2 to T1 in this engine.
Fig. 11.9
Carnot cycle for a heat engine with an
ideal gas as  the working substance.
A reversible heat engine operating between
two temperatures is called a Carnot engine.  We
have just argued that such an engine must have
the following sequence of steps constituting one
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 13 :
 PHYSICS
238
cycle, called the Carnot cycle, shown in
Fig. 11.9. We have taken the working substance
of the Carnot engine to be an ideal gas.
(a) Step 1 → 2 Isothermal expansion of the gas
taking its  state from (P1, V1, T1)  to
(P2, V2, T1).
The heat absorbed by the gas (Q1) from the
reservoir at temperature T1 is given by
Eq. (11.12). This is also the work done (W1 → 2)
by the gas on the environment.
W1 → 2  =  Q1 = µ R T1  ln 
V
V
2
1



          (11.18)
(b)
Step 2 → 3 Adiabatic expansion of the gas
from (P2, V2, T1) to (P3, V3, T2)
Work done by the gas, using
Eq. (11.16), is
W
R T
T
2
3
→=
−
(
)
−
  
  
µ
1
2
1
γ
(11.19)
(c)
Step 3 → 4 Isothermal compression of the
gas from (P3, V3, T2) to (P4, V4, T2).
Heat released (Q2) by the gas to the reservoir
at temperature T2 is given by Eq. (11.12).  This
is also the work done (W3 → 4) on the gas by the
environment.
W
RT
V
V
3 
 4
→
=
=




Q2
µ
2
3
4
ln
(11.20)
(d)
Step 4 → 1 Adiabatic compression of the
gas from (P4, V4, T2) to (P1,V1, T1).
Work done on the gas, [using Eq.(11.16), is
W
R T
T
4 
 1
→
=
−




µ
γ
1
2
-1
(11.21)
From  Eqs. (11.18) to (11.21) total work done
by the gas in one complete cycle is
W = W1 → 2  + W2 → 3 – W3  → 4 – W4 → 1
= µ RT1  ln 
V
V
2
1



 – µ RT2  ln
V
V
3
4




(11.22)
The efficiency η of the Carnot engine is
1
2
1
1
W
Q
Q
Q
η =
=
−
   
    
=
−











   
 
1
T
T
V
V
V
V
2
1
3
4
2
1
In
In
(11.23)
Now since step 2  → 3 is an adiabatic process,
T  V
T  V
1
2
2
3
γ
γ
−
−
=
1
1
i.e.
V
V
=  T
T
2
3
2
1
  



−
1
1
/(
)
γ
(11.24)
Similarly, since step 4 → 1 is an adiabatic
process
T  V
T  V
2
4
1
1
γ
γ
−
−
=
1
1
i.e.
V
V
= T
T
1
4
2
1




−
1
1
/γ
(11.25)
From Eqs. (11.24) and (11.25),
V
V
= V
V
3
4
2
1
    (11.26)
Using Eq. (11.26) in Eq. (11.23), we get
η =   
1 −T
T
2
1   (Carnot engine)
(11.27)
We have already seen that a Carnot engine
is a reversible engine. Indeed it is the only
reversible engine possible that works between
two reservoirs at different temperatures.  Each
step of the Carnot cycle given in Fig. 11.9 can
be reversed. This will amount to taking heat Q2
from the cold reservoir at T2, doing work W on
the system, and transferring heat Q1 to the hot
reservoir. This will be a reversible refrigerator.
We next establish the important result
(sometimes called Carnot’s theorem) that
(a) working between two given temperatures T1
and T2 of the hot and cold reservoirs respectively,
no engine can have efficiency more than that of
the Carnot engine and (b) the efficiency of the
Carnot engine is independent of the nature of
the working substance.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 14 :
 THERMODYNAMICS
239
To prove the result (a), imagine a reversible
(Carnot) engine R and an irreversible engine I
working between the same source (hot reservoir)
and sink (cold reservoir). Let us couple the
engines, I and R, in such a way so that I acts
like a heat engine and R acts as a refrigerator.
Let I absorb heat Q1 from the source, deliver
work W ′ and release the heat Q1- W′  to the sink.
We arrange so that R returns the same heat Q1
to the source, taking heat Q2 from the sink and
requiring work W = Q1 – Q2 to be done on it.
Now suppose ηR < ηI i.e. if R were to act
as an engine it would give less work output
reservoir and delivers the same amount of  work
in one cycle, without any change in the source
or anywhere else. This is clearly against the
Kelvin-Planck statement of the Second Law of
Thermodynamics.  Hence the assertion ηI > ηR
is wrong.  No engine can have efficiency greater
than that of the Carnot engine. A similar
argument can be constructed to show that a
reversible engine with one particular substance
cannot be more efficient than the one using
another substance. The maximum efficiency of
a Carnot engine given by Eq. (11.27) is
independent of the nature of the system
performing the Carnot cycle of operations. Thus
we are justified in using an ideal gas as a system
in the calculation of efficiency η of a Carnot
engine. The ideal gas has a simple equation of
state, which allows us to readily calculate η, but
the final result for η, [Eq. (11.27)], is true for
any Carnot engine.
This final remark shows that in a Carnot
cycle,
2
1
2
1
T
T
= 
Q
Q
(11.28)
is a universal relation independent of  the nature
of the system.  Here Q1 and Q2 are respectively,
the heat absorbed and released isothermally
(from the hot and to the cold reservoirs) in a
Carnot engine. Equation (11.28), can, therefore,
be used as a relation to define a truly universal
thermodynamic temperature scale that is
independent of any particular properties of the
system used in the Carnot cycle.  Of course, for
an ideal gas as a working substance, this
universal temperature is the same as the ideal
gas temperature introduced in section 11.9.
I
R
W
Fig. 11.10 An irreversible engine (I) coupled to a
reversible refrigerator (R). If W ′ > W, this
would amount to extraction of heat
W′ – W from the sink and its full
conversion to work, in contradiction with
the Second Law of Thermodynamics.
than that of I i.e. W < W ′ for a given Q1. With R
acting like a refrigerator, this would mean
Q2 =  Q1 – W >  Q1 – W ′. Thus, on the  whole,
the coupled I-R system extracts heat
(Q1 – W) – (Q1 – W ′) = (W ′ – W ) from the cold
SUMMARY
1.
The zeroth law of thermodynamics states that ‘two systems in thermal equilibrium with a
third system separately are in thermal equilibrium with each other’.  The Zeroth Law leads
to the concept of temperature.
2.
Internal energy of a system is the sum of kinetic energies and potential energies of the
molecular constituents of the system. It does not include the over-all kinetic energy of
the system. Heat and work are two modes of energy transfer to the system.  Heat is the
energy transfer arising due to temperature difference between the system and the
surroundings. Work is energy transfer brought about by other means, such as moving
the piston of a cylinder containing the gas, by raising or lowering some weight connected
to it.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 15 :
 PHYSICS
240
3.
The first law of thermodynamics is the general law of conservation of energy applied to
any system in which energy transfer from or to the surroundings (through heat and
work) is taken into account.  It states that
∆Q  = ∆U  +  ∆W
where ∆Q is the heat supplied to the system, ∆W is the work done by the system and ∆U
is the change in internal energy of the system.
4.
The specific heat capacity of a substance is defined by
s
m
Q
T
= 1 ∆
∆
where m is the mass of the substance and ∆Q is the heat required to change its
temperature by ∆T.  The molar specific heat capacity of a substance is defined by
1
Q
C
T
µ
∆
=
∆
where µ is the number  of moles of the substance. For a solid, the law of equipartition
of energy gives
C  =  3 R
which generally agrees with experiment at ordinary temperatures.
Calorie is the old unit of heat. 1 calorie is the amount of heat required to raise the
temperature of 1 g of water from 14.5 °C to 15.5 °C.  1 cal  =  4.186 J.
5.
For an ideal gas, the molar specific heat capacities at constant pressure and volume
satisfy the relation
Cp – Cv  = R
where R is the universal gas constant.
6.
Equilibrium states of a thermodynamic system are described by state variables. The
value of a state variable depends only on the particular state, not on the path used to
arrive at that state.  Examples of state variables are pressure (P ), volume (V ), temperature
(T ), and mass (m ).  Heat and work are not state variables.  An Equation of State (like
the ideal gas equation PV  =  µ RT ) is a relation connecting different state variables.
7.
A quasi-static process is an infinitely slow process such that the system remains in
thermal and mechanical equilibrium with the surroundings throughout. In a
quasi-static process, the pressure and temperature of the environment can differ from
those of the system only infinitesimally.
8.
In an isothermal expansion of an ideal gas from volume V1 to V2 at temperature T the
heat absorbed (Q) equals the work done (W ) by the gas, each given by
Q  =  W  =   µ R T   ln 






1
2
V
V
9.
In an adiabatic process of an ideal gas
PV
γ  =  constant
where
p
v
C
C
γ =
Work done by an ideal gas in an adiabatic change of state from (P1, V1, T1) to (P2, V2, T2)
is
(
)
  
 – 1
1
2
 R T
T
W
µ
γ
−
=
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 16 :
 THERMODYNAMICS
241
10. The second law of thermodynamics disallows some processes consistent with the First
Law of Thermodynamics. It states
Kelvin-Planck statement
No process is possible whose sole result is the absorption of heat from a reservoir and
complete conversion of the heat into work.
Clausius statement
No process is possible whose sole result is the transfer of heat from a colder object to a
hotter object.
Put simply, the Second Law implies that no heat engine can have efficiency η equal to
1 or no refrigerator can have co-efficient of performance α equal to infinity.
11. A process is reversible if it can be reversed such that both the system and the surroundings
return to their original states, with no other change anywhere else in the universe.
Spontaneous processes of nature are irreversible. The idealised reversible process is a
quasi-static process with no dissipative factors such as friction, viscosity, etc.
12. Carnot engine is a reversible engine operating between two temperatures T1 (source) and
T2 (sink). The Carnot cycle consists of two isothermal processes connected by two
adiabatic processes. The efficiency of a Carnot engine is given by
1
2
T
T
  
 
 1 −
= 
η
(Carnot engine)
No engine operating between two temperatures can have efficiency greater than that of
the Carnot engine.
13. If Q > 0, heat is added to the system
If Q < 0, heat is removed to the system
If W > 0, Work is done by the system
If W < 0, Work is done on the system
Quantity
Symbol
Dimensions
Unit
Remark
Co-efficienty of volume
αv
[K–1]
K–1
αv = 3 α1
expansion
Heat supplied to a system
∆Q
[ML2 T–2]
J
Q is not a state
variable
Specific heat capacity
s
[L2 T–2 K–1]
J kg–1 K–1
Thermal Conductivity
K
[MLT–3 K–1]
J s–1 K–1
H = – KA d
d
t
x
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
Temperature of a body is related to its average internal energy, not to the kinetic energy
of motion of its centre of mass. A bullet fired from a gun is not at a higher temperature
because of its high speed.
2.
Equilibrium in thermodynamics refers to the situation when macroscopic variables
describing the thermodynamic state of a system do not depend on time.  Equilibrium of
a system in mechanics means the net external force and torque on the system are zero.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 17 :
 PHYSICS
242
3.
In a state of thermodynamic equilibrium, the microscopic constituents of a system are
not in equilibrium (in the sense of mechanics).
4.
Heat capacity, in general, depends on the process the system goes through when heat is
supplied.
5.
In isothermal quasi-static processes, heat is absorbed or given out by the system even
though at every stage the gas has the same temperature as that of the surrounding
reservoir.  This is possible because of the infinitesimal difference in temperature between
the system and the reservoir.
EXERCISES
11.1
A geyser heats water flowing at the rate of 3.0 litres per minute from 27 °C to 77 °C.
If the geyser operates on a gas burner, what is the rate of consumption of the fuel if
its heat of combustion is 4.0 × 104 J/g ?
11.2
What amount of heat must be supplied to 2.0 × 10–2 kg of nitrogen (at room
temperature) to raise its temperature by 45 °C at constant pressure ? (Molecular
mass of N2 = 28; R = 8.3 J mol–1 K–1.)
11.3
Explain why
(a) Two bodies at different temperatures T1 and T2 if brought in thermal contact do
not necessarily settle to the mean temperature (T1 + T2 )/2.
(b) The coolant in a chemical or a nuclear plant (i.e., the liquid used to prevent
the different parts of a plant from getting too hot) should have high
specific heat.
(c)
Air pressure in a car tyre increases during driving.
(d) The climate of a harbour town is more temperate than that of a town in a desert
at the same latitude.
11.4
A cylinder with a movable piston contains 3 moles of hydrogen at standard temperature
and pressure. The walls of the cylinder are made of a heat insulator, and the piston
is insulated by having a pile of sand on it. By what factor does the pressure of the
gas increase if the gas is compressed to half its original volume ?
11.5
In changing the state of a gas adiabatically from an equilibrium state A to another
equilibrium state B, an amount of work equal to 22.3 J is done on the system. If the
gas is taken from state A to B via a process in which the net heat absorbed by the
system is 9.35 cal, how much is the net work done by the system in the latter case ?
(Take 1 cal = 4.19 J)
11.6
Two cylinders A and B of equal capacity are connected to each other via a stopcock.
A contains a gas at standard temperature and pressure. B is completely evacuated.
The entire system is thermally insulated. The stopcock is suddenly opened. Answer
the following :
(a) What is the final pressure of the gas in A and B ?
(b) What is the change in internal energy of the gas ?
(c)
What is the change in the temperature of the gas ?
(d) Do the intermediate states of the system (before settling to the final equilibrium
state) lie on its P-V-T surface ?
11.7
An electric heater supplies heat to a system at a rate of 100W. If system performs
work at a rate of 75 joules per second. At what rate is the internal
energy increasing?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 04 - Page 18 :
 THERMODYNAMICS
243
11.8
A thermodynamic system is taken from an original state to an intermediate state by
the linear process shown in Fig. (11.13)
Fig. 11.11
Its volume is then reduced to the original value from E to F by an isobaric process.
Calculate the total work done by the gas from D to E to F
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 1 :
 CHAPTER TWELVE
KINETIC THEORY
12.1 INTRODUCTION
Boyle discovered the law named after him in 1661. Boyle,
Newton and several others tried to explain the behaviour of
gases by considering that gases are made up of tiny atomic
particles. The actual atomic theory got established more than
150 years later. Kinetic theory explains the behaviour of gases
based on the idea that the gas  consists of rapidly moving
atoms or molecules. This is possible as the inter-atomic forces,
which are short range forces that are important for solids
and liquids,  can be neglected for gases. The kinetic theory
was developed in the nineteenth century by Maxwell,
Boltzmann and others. It has been remarkably successful. It
gives a molecular interpretation of  pressure and temperature
of a gas, and is consistent with gas laws and Avogadro’s
hypothesis. It correctly explains specific heat capacities of
many gases. It also relates measurable properties of gases
such as viscosity, conduction and diffusion with molecular
parameters, yielding estimates of molecular sizes and masses.
This chapter gives an introduction to kinetic theory.
12.2 MOLECULAR NATURE OF MATTER
Richard Feynman, one of the great physicists of 20th century
considers the discovery that “Matter is made up of atoms” to
be a very significant one. Humanity may suffer annihilation
(due to nuclear catastrophe) or extinction (due to
environmental disasters) if we do not act wisely. If that
happens, and all of scientific knowledge were to be destroyed
then Feynman would like the ‘Atomic Hypothesis’ to be
communicated to the next generation of creatures in the
universe. Atomic Hypothesis: All things are made of atoms -
little particles that move around in perpetual motion,
attracting each other when they are a little distance apart,
but repelling upon being squeezed into one another.
Speculation that matter may not be continuous, existed in
many places and cultures. Kanada in India and Democritus
12.1
Introduction
12.2
Molecular nature of matter
12.3
Behaviour of gases
12.4
Kinetic theory of an ideal gas
12.5
Law of equipartition of energy
12.6
Specific heat capacity
12.7
Mean free path
Summary
Points to ponder
Exercises
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 2 :
 KINETIC THEORY
245
in Greece had suggested that matter may consist
of indivisible constituents. The scientific ‘Atomic
Theory’  is usually credited to John Dalton. He
proposed the atomic  theory to explain the laws
of definite and multiple proportions obeyed by
elements when they combine into compounds.
The first law says that any given compound has,
a fixed proportion by mass of its constituents.
The second law says that when two elements
form more than one compound, for a fixed mass
of one element, the masses of the other elements
are in ratio of small integers.
To explain the laws Dalton suggested, about
200 years ago,  that the smallest constituents
of an element are atoms. Atoms of one element
are identical but differ from those of other
elements.  A small number of atoms of each
element combine to form a molecule of the
compound. Gay Lussac’s law, also given in early
19th century, states:  When gases combine
chemically to yield another gas, their volumes
are in the ratios of small integers.  Avogadro’s
law  (or hypothesis) says: Equal volumes of all
gases at equal temperature and pressure have
the same number of molecules.  Avogadro’s law,
when combined with Dalton’s theory explains
Gay  Lussac’s law.  Since the elements are often
in the form of molecules, Dalton’s atomic theory
can also be referred to as the molecular theory
of matter. The theory is now well accepted by
scientists. However even at the end of the
nineteenth century there were famous scientists
who did not believe in atomic theory !
From many observations, in recent times we
now know that  molecules (made up of one or
more atoms) constitute matter. Electron
microscopes  and scanning tunnelling
microscopes enable us to even see them. The
size of an atom is about an angstrom (10 -10   m).
In solids, which are tightly packed, atoms are
spaced about a few  angstroms (2 Å) apart. In
liquids the separation between atoms is also
about the same.  In liquids the atoms  are not
as rigidly fixed as in solids, and can move
around. This enables a liquid to flow.  In gases
the interatomic distances are in tens of
angstroms.  The average distance a molecule
can travel without colliding is called the  mean
free path. The mean free path, in gases, is of
the order of thousands of angstroms. The atoms
are much freer in gases and can travel long
distances without colliding. If they are not
enclosed, gases disperse away. In solids and
liquids the closeness makes the interatomic force
important. The force has a long range attraction
and a short range repulsion. The atoms attract
when they are at a few angstroms but repel when
they come closer. The static appearance of a gas
Atomic Hypothesis in Ancient India and Greece
Though John Dalton is credited with the introduction of atomic viewpoint in modern science, scholars in
ancient India and Greece conjectured long before the existence of atoms and molecules.  In the Vaiseshika
school of thought in India founded by Kanada (Sixth century B.C.) the atomic picture was developed in
considerable detail. Atoms were thought to be eternal, indivisible, infinitesimal and ultimate parts of matter.
It was argued that if matter could be subdivided without an end, there would be no difference between a
mustard seed and the Meru mountain.  The four kinds of atoms (Paramanu — Sanskrit word for the
smallest particle) postulated were Bhoomi (Earth), Ap (water), Tejas (fire) and Vayu (air) that have characteristic
mass and other attributes, were propounded. Akasa (space) was thought to have no atomic structure and
was continuous and inert. Atoms combine to form different molecules (e.g. two atoms combine to form a
diatomic molecule dvyanuka, three atoms form a tryanuka or a triatomic molecule), their properties depending
upon the nature and ratio of the constituent atoms.  The size of the atoms was also estimated, by conjecture
or by methods that are not known to us.  The estimates vary. In Lalitavistara, a famous biography of the
Buddha written mainly in the second century B.C., the estimate is close to the modern estimate of atomic
size, of the order of 10 –10 m.
   In ancient Greece, Democritus (Fourth century B.C.) is best known for his atomic hypothesis. The
word ‘atom’ means ‘indivisible’ in Greek. According to him, atoms differ from each other physically, in
shape, size and other properties and this resulted in the different properties of the substances formed
by their combination.  The atoms of water were smooth and round and unable to ‘hook’ on to each
other, which is why liquid /water flows easily.   The atoms of earth were rough and jagged, so they held
together to form hard substances.  The atoms of fire were thorny which is why it caused painful burns.
These fascinating ideas, despite their ingenuity, could not evolve much further, perhaps because they
were intuitive conjectures and speculations not tested and modified by quantitative experiments - the
hallmark of modern science.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 3 :
 246
PHYSICS
(
)
–1
–1
J mol
K
pV
T
µ
is misleading. The gas is full of activity and the
equilibrium is a dynamic one. In dynamic
equilibrium, molecules collide and change their
speeds during the collision. Only the average
properties are constant.
Atomic theory is not the end of our quest, but
the beginning. We now know that atoms are not
indivisible or elementary. They consist of a
nucleus and electrons. The nucleus itself is made
up of protons and neutrons. The protons and
neutrons are again made up of quarks. Even
quarks may not be the end of the story. There
may be string like elementary entities. Nature
always has surprises for us, but the search for
truth is often enjoyable and the discoveries
beautiful. In this chapter, we shall limit ourselves
to understanding the behaviour of gases (and a
little bit of solids), as a collection of moving
molecules in incessant motion.
12.3   BEHAVIOUR OF GASES
Properties of gases are easier to understand than
those of solids and liquids. This is mainly
because in a gas, molecules are far from each
other and their mutual interactions are
negligible except when two molecules collide.
Gases at low pressures and high temperatures
much above that at which they liquefy (or
solidify) approximately satisfy a simple relation
between their pressure, temperature and volume
given by (see Chapter 10)
PV = KT
(12.1)
for a given sample of the gas. Here T is the
temperature in kelvin or (absolute)  scale. K is  a
constant for the given sample but varies with
the volume of the gas. If we now  bring in  the
idea of atoms or molecules, then K is proportional
to the number of molecules, (say) N in the
sample. We can write K = N k . Observation tells
us that this k is same for all gases. It is called
Boltzmann constant and is denoted by k
B.
As 
1
1
2
2
1
1
2
2
P V
P V
N T
N T
=
 = constant = kB
(12.2)
if P, V and T are same, then N is also same for all
gases. This is Avogadro’s hypothesis, that  the
number of molecules per unit volume is
the same for all gases at a fixed temperature and
pressure. The number in 22.4 litres of any gas
is 6.02 × 1023. This is known as Avogadro number
and is denoted by NA. The mass of 22.4 litres of
any gas is equal to its molecular weight in grams
at S.T.P (standard temperature 273 K and
pressure 1 atm). This amount of substance is
called a mole (see Chapter 1 for a more precise
definition). Avogadro had guessed the equality of
numbers in equal volumes of gas at a fixed
temperature and pressure from chemical
reactions.  Kinetic  theory justifies this hypothesis.
The perfect gas equation can be written as
PV = µ RT
(12.3)
where  µ   is the number of moles and R  = NA
kB is a universal constant. The temperature T is
absolute temperature.  Choosing kelvin scale for
absolute temperature, R = 8.314 J mol–1K–1.
Here
0
A
M
N
M
N
µ =
=
(12.4)
where M is the mass of the gas containing N
molecules, M0 is the molar mass and NA the
Avogadro’s number. Using  Eqs. (12.4) and (12.3)
can also be written as
PV = kB NT
or
P = kB nT
P (atm)
Fig.12.1
Real gases approach ideal gas behaviour at
low pressures and high temperatures.
where  n is the number density, i.e. number of
molecules per unit volume. kB is  the Boltzmann
constant introduced above. Its value in SI units
is 1.38 × 10–23 J K–1.
Another useful form of Eq. (12.3) is
0
RT
P
M
ρ
=
(12.5)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 4 :
 KINETIC THEORY
247
⊳
where ρ is the mass density of the gas.
A gas that satisfies Eq. (12.3) exactly at all
pressures and temperatures is defined to be an
ideal gas. An ideal gas is a simple theoretical
model of a gas. No real gas is truly ideal.
Fig. 12.1 shows departures from ideal gas
behaviour for a real gas at three different
temperatures. Notice that all curves approach
the ideal gas behaviour for low  pressures and
high temperatures.
At low pressures or high temperatures the
molecules are far apart and molecular
interactions are negligible. Without interactions
the gas behaves like an ideal one.
If we fix µ and T in Eq. (12.3), we get
PV = constant
(12.6)
i.e., keeping temperature constant, pressure of
a given mass of gas varies inversely with volume.
This is the famous Boyle’s law. Fig. 12.2  shows
comparison between experimental P-V curves
and the theoretical curves predicted by Boyle’s
law. Once again you see that the  agreement is
good at high temperatures and  low pressures.
Next, if you fix P, Eq. (12.1) shows that V ∝  T i.e.,
for a fixed pressure, the volume of a gas is
proportional to its absolute temperature T
(Charles’ law). See Fig. 12.3.
Fig.12.2
Experimental P-V curves (solid lines) for
steam at three temperatures compared with
Boyle’s law (dotted lines). P is in units of 22
atm and V in units of 0.09 litres.
Finally, consider a mixture of non-interacting
ideal  gases: µ
1  moles of gas 1, µ
2 moles of gas 2,
etc. in a vessel of volume V at temperature T and
pressure P. It is then found that the equation  of
state of the mixture is :
PV = ( µ1 + µ2 +…  ) RT
(12.7)
i.e. 
1
2
...
RT
RT
P
V
V
µ
µ
=
+
+
(12.8)
= P1 + P2 + …
(12.9)
Clearly P1 =    µ1 R T/V   is the pressure that
gas 1 would  exert at the same conditions of
volume and  temperature if no other gases were
present. This is called the partial pressure of the
gas. Thus, the total pressure of a mixture of ideal
gases is the sum of partial pressures. This is
Dalton’s law of partial pressures.
Fig. 12.3 Experimental T-V curves (solid lines) for CO2
at three pressures compared with Charles’
law (dotted lines). T is in units of 300 K and
V in units of 0.13 litres.
We next consider some examples which give
us information about the volume occupied by
the molecules and the volume of a single
molecule.
Example 12.1 The density of water is  1000
kg m–3. The density of water vapour at 100 °C
and 1 atm pressure is 0.6 kg m–3. The
volume of a molecule multiplied by the total
number gives ,what is called, molecular
volume. Estimate the ratio (or fraction) of
the molecular volume  to the total volume
occupied by the water vapour under the
above conditions of temperature and
pressure.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 5 :
 248
PHYSICS
⊳
⊳
Answer For  a given mass of water molecules,
the density is less if volume is large. So the
volume of the vapour is  1000/0.6  = 1/(6 × 10 -4 )
times larger.  If densities of bulk water and water
molecules are same, then the fraction of
molecular volume to the total volume in liquid
state is 1. As volume in vapour state has
increased, the fractional volume is less by the
same amount, i.e.  6×10-4.
 ⊳
Example 12.2   Estimate the volume of a
water molecule using the data in Example
12.1.
Answer In the liquid (or solid) phase, the
molecules of water are quite closely packed. The
density of water molecule may therefore, be
regarded as roughly equal to the density of bulk
water = 1000 kg m–3. To estimate the volume of
a water molecule, we need to know the mass of
a single water molecule. We know that 1 mole
of water has a mass approximately equal to
(2 + 16)g  = 18 g  =  0.018 kg.
Since 1 mole   contains  about   6 × 1023
molecules   (Avogadro’s  number),   the mass of
a molecule of water is  (0.018)/(6 × 1023) kg  =
3 × 10–26 kg. Therefore, a rough estimate of the
volume of a water  molecule is as follows :
Volume of a water molecule
= (3 × 10–26 kg)/ (1000 kg m–3)
= 3 × 10–29 m3
= (4/3) π  (Radius)3
Hence, Radius ≈ 2 ×10-10  m = 2 Å
⊳
Example 12.3   What is the average
distance between atoms (interatomic
distance) in water? Use the data given in
Examples 12.1 and 12.2.
Answer :   A given mass of water in vapour state
has 1.67×103 times the volume of the same mass
of water in liquid state (Ex. 12.1). This is also
the increase in the amount of volume available
for each molecule of water. When volume
increases by 103 times the radius increases by
V1/3 or 10 times, i.e., 10 × 2 Å  = 20 Å. So the
average distance is 2 × 20 = 40  Å.
    ⊳
Example 12.4 A vessel contains two non-
reactive gases : neon (monatomic) and
oxygen (diatomic). The ratio of their partial
pressures is 3:2. Estimate the ratio of  (i)
number of molecules and (ii) mass density
of neon and oxygen in the vessel. Atomic
mass of Ne = 20.2 u, molecular mass of O2
= 32.0 u.
Answer Partial pressure of a gas in a mixture is
the pressure it would have for the same volume
and temperature if it alone occupied the vessel.
(The total pressure of a mixture of non-reactive
gases is the sum of partial pressures due to its
constituent gases.) Each gas (assumed ideal)
obeys the gas law. Since V and T are common to
the two gases,  we  have  P1V = µ 1 RT and P2V =
µ2 RT, i.e. (P1/P2) = (µ1 / µ2). Here 1 and 2 refer
to neon and oxygen respectively. Since (P1/P2) =
(3/2) (given), (µ1/ µ2) = 3/2.
(i)
By definition µ1 = (N1/NA ) and µ2 = (N2/NA)
where N1 and N2 are the number of molecules
of 1 and 2, and NA is the Avogadro’s number.
Therefore, (N1/N2) = (µ1 / µ2)  = 3/2.
(ii) We can also write µ1 = (m1/M1) and µ2 =
(m2/M2) where m1 and m2 are the masses of
1 and 2; and M1 and M2 are their molecular
masses. (Both m1 and M1; as well as m2 and
M2 should be expressed in the same units).
If ρ1 and ρ2  are the mass densities of 1 and
2 respectively,  we have
ρ
ρ
µ
µ
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
=
=
=
× 



m
V
m
V
m
m
M
M
/
/
3
20.2
0.947
2
32.0
=
×
=
  ⊳
12.4 KINETIC THEORY OF AN IDEAL GAS
Kinetic theory of gases is based on the molecular
picture of matter. A given amount of gas is a
collection of a large number of molecules
(typically of the order of Avogadro’s number) that
are in incessant random motion. At ordinary
pressure and temperature, the average distance
between molecules is a factor of 10 or more than
the typical size of a molecule (2 Å). Thus,
interaction between molecules is negligible and
we can assume that they move freely in straight
lines according to Newton’s first law. However,
occasionally, they come close to each other,
experience intermolecular forces and their
velocities change.  These interactions are called
collisions. The molecules collide incessantly
against each other or with the walls and change
⊳
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 6 :
 KINETIC THEORY
249
their velocities.  The collisions are considered to
be elastic. We can derive an expression for the
pressure of a gas based on the kinetic theory.
We begin with the idea that molecules of a
gas are in incessant random motion, colliding
against one another and with the walls of the
container. All collisions between molecules
among themselves or between molecules and the
walls are elastic. This implies that  total kinetic
energy is conserved. The total momentum is
conserved as usual.
12.4.1 Pressure of an Ideal Gas
Consider a gas enclosed in a cube of side l. Take
the axes to be parallel to the sides of the cube,
as shown in Fig. 12.4.  A molecule with velocity
(vx, vy, vz ) hits the planar wall parallel to yz-
plane of area A (= l2). Since the collision is elastic,
the molecule rebounds with the same velocity;
its y and z components of velocity do not change
in the collision but the x-component reverses
sign. That is, the velocity after collision is
(-vx, vy, vz ) . The change in momentum of the
molecule is:  –mvx – (mvx) = – 2mvx . By the
principle of conservation of momentum, the
momentum imparted to the wall in the collision
= 2mvx .
the wall. Thus, the number of molecules with
velocity (vx, vy, vz )  hitting the wall in time ∆t is
½A vx  ∆t n, where n is the number of molecules
per unit volume. The total momentum
transferred to the wall by these molecules in
time ∆t  is:
Q = (2mvx) (½ n A vx ∆t )
(12.10)
The force on the wall is the rate of momentum
transfer Q/∆t  and pressure is force per unit
area :
P =  Q /(A ∆t)  =  n m vx
2
(12.11)
Actually, all molecules in a gas do not have
the same velocity; there is a distribution in
velocities.  The  above equation, therefore, stands
for pressure due to the group of molecules with
speed vx  in  the x-direction and n stands for the
number density of that group of molecules. The
total  pressure is obtained by summing over the
contribution due to all groups:
P = n m 
2
x
v
(12.12)
where
2
x
v
 is the average of  vx
2  .  Now the gas
is isotropic, i.e. there is no preferred direction
of velocity of the molecules in the vessel.
Therefore, by symmetry,
2
x
v
 = 
2
y
v
 = 
2
z
v
= (1/3) [
2
x
v
 +  
2
y
v
 + 
2
z
v
] = (1/3) 
2
v
(12.13)
where v is the speed and 
2
v
  denotes the mean
of the squared speed. Thus
P = (1/3) n m 
2
v
(12.14)
Some remarks on this derivation. First,
though we choose the container to be a cube,
the shape of the vessel really is immaterial. For
a vessel of arbitrary shape, we can always choose
a small infinitesimal (planar) area and carry
through the steps above. Notice that both A and
∆t do not appear in the final result. By Pascal’s
law, given in Ch. 9,  pressure in one portion of
the gas  in equilibrium is the same as anywhere
else. Second, we have ignored any collisions in
the derivation. Though this assumption is
difficult to justify rigorously, we can qualitatively
see that it will not lead to erroneous results. The
number of molecules hitting the wall in time ∆t
was found to be ½ n Avx ∆t. Now the collisions
are random and the gas is in a steady state.
Thus, if a molecule with velocity (vx, vy, vz )
acquires a  different velocity due to collision with
some molecule, there will always be some other
Fig. 12.4
Elastic collision of a gas molecule with the
wall of the container.
To calculate the force (and pressure) on the
wall, we need to calculate momentum imparted
to the wall per unit time. In a small time interval
∆t, a molecule with x-component of velocity vx
will hit the wall if it is within the distance vx ∆t
from the wall. That is, all molecules within the
volume Avx ∆t only can hit the wall in time ∆t.
But, on the average, half of these are moving
towards the wall and the other half away from
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 7 :
 250
PHYSICS
⊳
molecule with a different initial velocity which
after a collision acquires the velocity  (vx, vy, vz ).
If this were not so, the distribution of velocities
would not remain steady. In any case we are
finding 
2
x
v
. Thus, on the whole, molecular
collisions (if they are not too frequent and the
time spent in a collision is negligible compared
to time between collisions)  will not affect the
calculation above.
12.4.2 Kinetic Interpretation of Temperature
Equation (13.14) can be written as
PV   =  (1/3) nV m 
2
v
(12.15a)
PV   =   (2/3) N x ½ m 
2
v
(12.15b)
where N (= nV) is the number of molecules in
the sample.
The quantity in the bracket is the average
translational kinetic energy of the molecules in
the gas. Since the internal energy E of an ideal
gas is purely kinetic*,
E = N × (1/2) m 
2
v
(12.16)
Equation (12.15) then gives :
PV = (2/3) E
(12.17)
We are now ready for a kinetic interpretation
of temperature. Combining Eq. (12.17) with the
ideal gas Eq. (12.3), we get
E = (3/2)  kB  NT                                             (12.18)
or  E/ N = ½  m 
2
v
   =   (3/2) kBT
(12.19)
i.e., the average kinetic energy of a molecule is
proportional to the absolute temperature of the
gas; it is independent of pressure, volume or
the nature of the ideal gas. This is a fundamental
result relating temperature, a macroscopic
measurable 
parameter 
of 
a 
gas
(a thermodynamic variable as it is called) to a
molecular quantity, namely the average kinetic
energy of a molecule. The two domains are
connected by the Boltzmann constant. We note
in passing that Eq. (12.18) tells us that internal
energy of an ideal gas depends only on
temperature, not on pressure or volume. With
this interpretation of temperature, kinetic theory
of an ideal gas is completely consistent with the
ideal gas equation and the various gas laws
based on it.
For a mixture of non-reactive ideal gases, the
total pressure gets contribution from each gas
in the mixture. Equation (12.14) becomes
P = (1/3) [n1m1
2
1
v
 + n2 m2 
2
2
v
+…  ]
(12.20)
In equilibrium, the average kinetic energy of
the molecules of different gases will be equal.
That is,
½  m1 
2
1
v
 = ½ m2 
2
2
v
= (3/2) kB T
so that
P = (n1 + n2 +…  ) kB T
(12.21)
which is Dalton’s law of partial pressures.
From Eq. (12.19), we can get an idea of the
typical speed of molecules in a gas. At a
temperature T = 300 K, the mean square speed
of a molecule in nitrogen gas is :
2
–26
26
28
4.65
10
6.02
10
N
A
M
m
N
=
=
=
×
×
 kg.
2
v
  =  3 kB T / m    =    (516)2 m2s-2
The square root of 
2
v
 is known as root mean
square (rms) speed and is denoted by vrms,
( We can also write    
2
v
    as   < v2 >.)
vrms   =    516 m s-1
The speed is of the order of the speed of sound
in air. It follows from Eq. (12.19) that at the same
temperature, lighter molecules have greater rms
speed.
Example 12.5 A flask contains argon and
chlorine in the ratio of 2:1 by mass.  The
temperature of the mixture is 27 °C. Obtain
the ratio of  (i) average kinetic energy per
molecule, and (ii) root mean square speed
vrms of the molecules of the two gases.
Atomic mass of argon = 39.9 u; Molecular
mass of chlorine = 70.9 u.
Answer The important point to remember is that
the average kinetic energy (per molecule) of any
(ideal) gas (be it monatomic like argon, diatomic
like chlorine or polyatomic) is always equal to
(3/2) kBT. It depends only on temperature, and
is independent of the nature of the gas.
(i)
Since argon and chlorine both have the same
temperature in the flask, the ratio of average
kinetic energy (per molecule) of the two gases
is 1:1.
(ii) Now  ½ m vrms
2  =  average kinetic energy per
molecule =  (3/2) ) kBT where m is the mass
*
E denotes the translational part of the internal energy U that may include energies due to other degrees of
freedom also. See section 12.5.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 8 :
 KINETIC THEORY
251
⊳
⊳
of a molecule of the gas. Therefore,
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
2
Cl
Cl
Ar
2
Ar
Ar
Cl
rms
rms
m
M
m
M
=
=
v
v
= 70.9
39.9  =1.77
where M denotes the molecular mass of the gas.
(For argon, a molecule is just an atom of argon.)
Taking square root of both sides,
(
)
(
)
Ar
Cl
rms
rms
v
v
 =  1.33
You should note that the composition of the
mixture by mass is quite irrelevant to the above
calculation. Any other proportion by mass of
argon and chlorine would give the same answers
to (i) and (ii), provided the temperature remains
unaltered.
⊳
Example 12.6   Uranium has two isotopes
of masses 235 and 238 units. If both are
present in Uranium hexafluoride gas which
would have the  larger average speed ? If
atomic mass of fluorine is 19 units,
estimate the percentage difference in
speeds at any temperature.
Answer  At a fixed temperature the average
energy  = ½ m <v2 > is constant. So  smaller the
mass of the molecule, faster will be the speed.
The ratio of speeds is inversely proportional to
the square root of the ratio of the masses. The
masses are 349 and 352 units. So
v349 / v352  =   ( 352/ 349)1/2 = 1.0044 .
Hence difference 
V
V
∆
= 0.44 %.
[235U is the isotope needed for nuclear fission.
To separate it from the more abundant isotope
238U,  the mixture  is surrounded by a  porous
cylinder. The porous cylinder must be thick and
narrow, so that the molecule wanders through
individually, colliding with the walls of the long
pore. The faster molecule will leak out more than
the slower one and so there is more of the lighter
molecule (enrichment) outside the porous
cylinder (Fig. 12.5). The method is not very
efficient and has to be repeated several times
for sufficient enrichment.].
⊳
When gases diffuse, their rate of diffusion is
inversely proportional to square root of the
masses (see Exercise 12.12 ). Can you guess the
explanation from the above answer?
Fig. 12.5  Molecules going through a porous wall.
Example 12.7  (a)  When a molecule (or an
elastic ball) hits a ( massive) wall, it
rebounds with the same speed. When a ball
hits a massive bat held firmly, the same
thing happens. However, when the bat is
moving towards the ball, the ball rebounds
with a different speed. Does the ball move
faster or slower? (Ch.5 will refresh your
memory on elastic collisions.)
(b) When gas in a cylinder is compressed
by pushing in a piston, its temperature
rises. Guess at an explanation of this in
terms of kinetic theory using (a) above.
(c) What happens when a compressed gas
pushes a piston out and expands. What
would you observe ?
(d) Sachin Tendulkar used a heavy cricket
bat while playing. Did it help him in
anyway ?
Answer  (a)  Let the speed of the ball be u  relative
to the wicket behind the bat. If the bat is moving
towards the ball with a speed V  relative to the
wicket, then the relative speed of the ball to bat
is V + u  towards the bat. When the ball rebounds
(after hitting the massive bat) its speed,  relative
to bat,  is V + u  moving away from the bat. So
relative to the wicket the speed of the rebounding
ball is V + (V + u) = 2V + u, moving away from the
wicket. So the ball speeds up after the collision
with the bat. The rebound speed will be less than
u if the bat is not massive. For a molecule this
would imply an increase in temperature.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 9 :
 252
PHYSICS
You  should be able to answer (b) (c) and (d)
based on the answer to (a).
(Hint: Note the correspondence, pistonà bat,
cylinder à wicket, molecule à ball.)         ⊳
12.5  LAW OF EQUIPARTITION OF ENERGY
The kinetic energy of a single molecule is
2
2
2
1
1
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
2
2
t
x
y
z
mv
mv
mv
ε
=
+
+
(12.22)
For a gas in thermal equilibrium at
temperature T  the average value of energy
denoted by   <
tε > is
2
2
2
1
1
1
3
2
2
2
2
t
x
y
z
B
mv
mv
mv
k T
ε
=
+
+
=
(12.23)
Since there is no preferred direction, Eq. (12.23)
implies
2
1
1
 
 
 
 
2
2
x
B
mv
k T
=
 ,
2
1
1
 
 
 
 
2
2
y
B
mv
k T
=
,
2
1
1
 
 
 
 
2
2
z
B
mv
k T
=
(12.24)
A molecule free to move in space needs three
coordinates to specify its location. If it is
constrained to move in a plane it needs two; and
if constrained to move along a line, it needs just
one coordinate to locate it. This can also be
expressed in another way. We say that it has
one degree of freedom for motion in a line, two
for motion in a plane and three for motion in
space. Motion of a body as a whole from one
point to another is called translation. Thus, a
molecule free to move in space has three
translational degrees of freedom. Each
translational degree of freedom contributes a
term that contains square of some variable of
motion, e.g., ½ mvx
2  and similar terms in
vy and vz. In, Eq. (12.24) we see that in thermal
equilibrium, the average of each such term is
½ kBT .
Molecules of a monatomic gas like argon have
only translational degrees of freedom. But what
about a diatomic gas such as O2 or N2? A
molecule of O2 has three translational degrees
of freedom. But in addition it can also rotate
about its centre of mass. Figure 12.6 shows the
two independent axes of rotation 1 and 2, normal
to the axis joining the two oxygen atoms about
which the molecule can rotate*. The molecule
thus has two rotational degrees of freedom, each
of which contributes a term to the total energy
consisting of translational energy 
tε
 and
rotational energy εr.
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
t
r
x
y
z
mv
mv
mv
I
I
ε
ε
ω
ω
+
=
+
+
+
+
(12.25)
*
Rotation along the line joining the atoms has very small moment of inertia and does not come into play for
quantum mechanical reasons. See end of section 12.6.
Fig. 12.6
The two independent axes of rotation of
a diatomic molecule
where ω1 and ω2  are the angular speeds about
the axes 1 and 2 and I1, I2 are the corresponding
moments of inertia. Note that each rotational
degree of freedom contributes a term to the
energy that contains square of a rotational
variable of motion.
We have assumed above that the O2 molecule
is a ‘rigid rotator’, i.e., the molecule does not
vibrate. This assumption, though found to be
true (at moderate temperatures) for O2, is not
always valid. Molecules, like CO, even at
moderate temperatures have a mode of
vibration, i.e., its atoms oscillate along the
interatomic axis like a one-dimensional
oscillator, and contribute a vibrational energy
term εv to the total energy:
εv
m
y
t
ky
=




+
1
2
1
2
2
2
d
d
t
r
v
ε
ε
ε
= 
+
+ ε
(12.26)
where k is the force constant of the oscillator
and y the vibrational co-ordinate.
Once again the vibrational energy terms in
Eq. (12.26) contain squared terms of vibrational
variables of motion y and dy/dt .
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 10 :
 KINETIC THEORY
253
At this point, notice an important feature in
Eq.(12.26). While each translational and
rotational degree of freedom has contributed only
one ‘squared term’ in Eq.(12.26), one vibrational
mode contributes two ‘squared terms’ : kinetic
and potential energies.
Each quadratic term occurring in the
expression for energy is a mode of absorption of
energy by the molecule. We have seen that in
thermal equilibrium at absolute temperature T,
for each translational mode of motion, the
average energy is ½ kBT. The most elegant
principle of classical statistical mechanics (first
proved by Maxwell) states that this is so for each
mode of energy: translational, rotational and
vibrational. That is, in equilibrium, the total
energy is equally distributed in all possible
energy modes, with each mode having an average
energy equal to  ½ kBT. This is known as the law
of equipartition of energy. Accordingly, each
translational and rotational degree of freedom
of a molecule contributes ½ kBT  to the energy,
while each vibrational frequency contributes
2 × ½ kBT  = kBT ,  since a vibrational mode has
both kinetic and potential energy modes.
The proof of the law of equipartition of energy
is beyond the scope of this book. Here, we shall
apply the law to predict the specific heats of gases
theoretically. Later, we shall also discuss briefly,
the application to specific heat  of solids.
12.6  SPECIFIC HEAT CAPACITY
12.6.1 Monatomic Gases
The molecule of a monatomic gas has only three
translational degrees of freedom. Thus, the
average energy of a molecule at temperature
T is (3/2)kBT .  The total internal energy of a mole
of such a gas is
3
3
 
2
2
B
A
U
k T
N
RT
=
×
=
(12.27)
The molar specific heat at constant volume,
Cv, is
 Cv (monatomic gas) = d
d
U
T  = 3
2 RT
(12.28)
For an ideal gas,
Cp – Cv = R
(12.29)
where Cp is the molar specific heat at constant
pressure.  Thus,
Cp = 5
2
 R
   (12.30)
The ratio of specific heats 
p
v
5
3
C
C
γ =
=
   (12.31)
12.6.2 Diatomic Gases
As explained earlier, a diatomic molecule treated
as a rigid rotator, like a dumbbell, has 5 degrees
of freedom: 3 translational and 2 rotational.
Using the law of equipartition of energy, the total
internal energy of a mole of such a gas is
5
5
2
2
B
A
U
k T
N
RT
=
×
=
(12.32)
The molar specific heats are then given by
Cv (rigid diatomic) = 5
2
R, Cp = 7
2
R
(12.33)
γ (rigid diatomic) = 7
5
(12.34)
If the diatomic molecule is not rigid but has
in addition a vibrational mode
U 
k T
k T N
 
RT
B
B
A
=
+






=
5
2
7
2
7
9
9
, 
, 
2
2
7
v
p
C
R C
R γ
=
=
=
R
(12.35)
12.6.3 Polyatomic Gases
In general a polyatomic molecule has 3
translational, 3 rotational degrees of freedom
and a certain number ( f ) of vibrational modes.
According to the law of equipartition of energy,
it is easily seen that one mole of such a gas has
U = 3
2


 kBT + 3
2
 kBT + f kBT


 NA
i.e.,Cv = (3 + f ) R,  Cp = (4 + f ) R,
(
)
(
)
f
f
γ
4 +
= 3 +
(12.36)
Note that Cp – Cv = R is true for any ideal
gas, whether mono, di or polyatomic.
Table 12.1 summarises the theoretical
predictions for specific heats of gases ignoring
any vibrational modes of motion. The values are
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 11 :
 254
PHYSICS
⊳
in good agreement with experimental values of
specific heats of several gases given in Table 12.2.
Of course, there are discrepancies between
predicted and actual values of specific heats of
several other gases (not shown in the table), such
as Cl2, C2H6 and many other polyatomic gases.
Usually, the experimental values for specific
heats of these gases are greater than the
predicted values as given in Table12.1 suggesting
that the agreement can be improved by including
vibrational modes of motion in the calculation.
The  law of equipartition of energy is, thus, well
verified experimentally at ordinary temperatures.
Table 12.1
Predicted values of specific heat
capacities of gases (ignoring
vibrational modes)
Nature of
Gas
Cv
(J mol-1 K-1)
Cp
(J mol-1 K-1)
Cp - Cv
(J mol-1 K-1)
g
Monatomic
12.5
20.8
8.31
1.67
Diatomic
20.8
29.1
8.31
1.40
Triatomic
24.93
33.24
8.31
1.33
Table12.2
Measured values of specific heat
capacities of some gases
Example 12.8 A cylinder of fixed capacity
44.8 litres contains helium gas at standard
temperature and pressure. What is the
amount of heat needed to raise the
temperature of the gas in the cylinder by
15.0 °C ? (R = 8.31 J mo1–1 K–1).
Answer Using the gas law PV = µRT, you can
easily show that 1 mol of any (ideal) gas at
standard temperature (273 K) and pressure
(1 atm = 1.01 × 105 Pa) occupies a volume of  22.4
litres. This universal volume is called molar
volume. Thus the cylinder in this example
contains 2 mol of helium. Further, since helium
is monatomic, its predicted (and observed) molar
specific heat at constant volume, Cv = (3/2) R,
and molar specific heat at constant pressure,
Cp = (3/2) R + R = (5/2) R.  Since the volume of
the cylinder is fixed, the heat required is
determined by Cv. Therefore,
Heat required = no. of moles × molar specific heat
× rise in temperature
= 2 × 1.5 R × 15.0 = 45 R
= 45 × 8.31 = 374 J.
⊳
12.6.4   Specific Heat Capacity of Solids
We can use the law of equipartition of energy to
determine specific heats of solids. Consider a
solid of N atoms, each vibrating about its mean
position. An oscillation in one dimension has
average energy of 2 × ½ kBT = kBT . In three
dimensions, the average energy is 3 kBT. For a
mole of solid, N = NA, and the total
energy is
U =  3  kBT × NA  = 3 RT
Now at constant pressure ∆Q = ∆U + P∆V
= ∆U,  since for a solid  ∆V is negligible. Hence,
 
3
Q
U
C
R
T
T
∆
∆
=
=
=
∆
∆
(12.37)
Table 12.3
Specific Heat Capacity of some
solids at room temperature and
atmospheric pressure
As Table 12.3 shows the prediction generally
agrees with experimental values at ordinary
temperature (Carbon is an exception).
12.7  MEAN FREE PATH
Molecules in a gas have rather large speeds of
the order of the speed of sound. Yet a gas leaking
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 12 :
 KINETIC THEORY
255
⊳
from a cylinder in a kitchen takes considerable
time to diffuse to the other corners of the room.
The top of a cloud of smoke holds together for
hours. This happens because molecules in a gas
have a finite though small size, so they are bound
to undergo collisions. As a result, they cannot
move straight unhindered; their paths keep
getting incessantly deflected.
Fig. 12.7 The volume swept by a molecule in time ∆t
in which any molecule will collide with it.
Suppose the molecules of a gas are spheres of
diameter d. Focus on a single molecule with the
average speed <v>. It will suffer collision with
any molecule that comes within a distance d
between the centres. In time ∆t, it sweeps a
volume πd2 <v> ∆t wherein any other molecule
will collide with it (see Fig. 12.7). If n is the
number of molecules per unit volume, the
molecule suffers nπd2 <v> ∆t  collisions in time
∆t. Thus the rate of collisions is  nπd2 <v> or the
time between two successive collisions is on the
average,
τ  = 1/(nπ <v> d2 )
(12.38)
The average distance between two successive
collisions, called the mean free path l, is :
l  = <v> τ = 1/(nπd2)
(12.39)
In this derivation, we imagined the other
molecules to be at rest. But actually all molecules
are moving and the collision rate is determined
by the average relative velocity of the molecules.
Thus we need to replace <v> by <v
r> in Eq.
(12.38). A more exact treatment gives
(
)
2
1/
2
l
n d
π
=
(12.40)
Let us estimate l and τ  for air molecules with
average speeds  <v> = ( 485m/s). At STP
n = 
(
)
(
)
×
×
23
–3
0.02
10
22.4
10
=  2.7 × 10 25 m -3.
Taking, d = 2 × 10–10 m,
τ = 6.1 × 10–10 s
and l = 2.9 × 10–7 m ≈ 1500 d
(12.41)
As expected, the mean free path given by
Eq. (12.40) depends inversely on the number
density and the size of the molecules. In a highly
evacuated tube n is rather small and the mean
free path can be as large as the length of the
tube.
Example 12.9 Estimate the mean free path
for a water molecule in water vapour at 373 K.
Use information from Exercises 12.1 and Eq.
(12.41) above.
Answer The d for water vapour is same as that
of air. The number density is inversely
proportional to absolute temperature.
So 
25
25
–3
273
2.7
10
2
10
m
373
n =
×
×
=
×
Hence, mean free path 
–7
4
10
m
l =
×
⊳
Note that the mean free path is 100 times the
interatomic distance ~ 40 Å = 4 × 10-9 m calculated
earlier. It is this large value of mean free path that
leads to the typical gaseous behaviour. Gases can
not be confined without a container.
Using, the kinetic theory of gases, the bulk
measurable properties like viscosity, heat
conductivity and diffusion can be related to the
microscopic parameters like molecular size. It is
through such relations that the molecular sizes
were first estimated.
t
d
d
v
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 13 :
 256
PHYSICS
SUMMARY
1.
The ideal gas equation connecting pressure (P), volume (V) and absolute temperature
(T ) is
                                         PV = µ RT     = kB NT
where µ is the number of moles and N is the number of molecules. R and kB are universal
constants.
R = 8.314 J mol–1 K–1,     kB  = 
A
R
N
   = 1.38 ××××× 10–23 J K–1
Real gases satisfy the ideal gas equation only approximately, more so at low pressures
and high temperatures.
2.
Kinetic theory of an ideal gas gives the relation
                                        
2
1
3
P   n m v
=
where n is number density of molecules, m the mass of the molecule and 
2
v    is the
mean of squared speed. Combined with the ideal gas equation it yields a kinetic
interpretation of temperature.
2
1
3
2
2
B
 m v    k  T
=
,  
( )
1/2
2
 
rms
v
v
=
3
B
k T
m
=
This tells us that  the temperature of a gas is a measure of the average kinetic energy of
a molecule, independent of the nature of the gas or molecule. In a mixture of gases at a
fixed temperature the heavier molecule has the lower average speed.
3.
The translational kinetic energy
E = 
2
3  kB NT.
This leads to a relation
PV = 2
3
 E
4.
The law of equipartition of energy states that if a system is in equilibrium at absolute
temperature T, the total energy is distributed equally in different energy modes of
absorption, the energy in each mode being equal to ½ kB T. Each translational and
rotational degree of freedom corresponds to one energy mode of absorption and has
energy ½ kB T. Each vibrational frequency has two modes of energy (kinetic and potential)
with corresponding energy equal to
2 ××××× ½ kB T = kB T.
5.
Using the law of equipartition of energy, the molar specific heats of gases can be
determined and the values are in agreement with the experimental values of specific
heats of several gases. The agreement can be improved by including vibrational modes
of motion.
6.
The mean free path l is the average distance covered by a molecule between two successive
collisions :
2
1
2
π
 = 
l
 n  d
where n is the number density and d the diameter of the molecule.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 14 :
 KINETIC THEORY
257
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
Pressure of a fluid is not only exerted on the wall. Pressure exists everywhere in a fluid.
Any layer of gas inside the volume of a container is in equilibrium because the pressure
is the same on both sides of the layer.
2.
We should not have an exaggerated idea of the intermolecular distance in a gas. At
ordinary pressures and temperatures, this is only 10 times or so the interatomic distance
in solids and liquids. What is different is the mean free path which in a gas is 100 times
the interatomic distance and 1000 times the size of the molecule.
3.
The law of equipartition of energy is stated thus: the energy for each degree of freedom
in thermal equilibrium is ½ k
B T. Each quadratic term in the total energy expression of
a molecule is to be counted as a degree of freedom. Thus, each vibrational mode gives 2
(not 1) degrees of freedom (kinetic and potential energy modes), corresponding to the
energy 2 ××××× ½ k
B T = k
B T.
4.
Molecules of air in a room do not all fall and settle on the ground (due to gravity)
because of their high speeds and incessant collisions. In equilibrium, there is a very
slight increase in density at lower heights (like in the atmosphere). The effect is small
since the potential energy (mgh) for ordinary heights is much less than the average
kinetic energy ½ mv2 of the molecules.
5.
< v2 >  is not always equal to ( < v >)2. The average of a squared quantity is not necessarily
the square of the average. Can you find examples for this statement.
EXERCISES
EXERCISES
EXERCISES
EXERCISES
EXERCISES
12.1
12.1
12.1
12.1
12.1
Estimate the fraction of molecular volume to the actual volume occupied by oxygen
gas at STP. Take the diameter of an oxygen molecule to be 3 Å.
12.2
12.2
12.2
12.2
12.2
Molar volume is the volume occupied by 1 mol of any (ideal) gas at standard
temperature and pressure (STP : 1 atmospheric pressure, 0 °C). Show that it is 22.4
litres.
12.3
12.3
12.3
12.3
12.3
Figure 12.8 shows plot of PV/T  versus P for 1.00×××××10–3 kg of oxygen gas at two
different temperatures.
Fig. 12.8
Fig. 12.8
Fig. 12.8
Fig. 12.8
Fig. 12.8
(a) What does the dotted plot signify?
(b) Which is true: T1 > T2 or T1 < T2?
(c) What is the value of PV/T where the curves meet on the y-axis?
PV
T (J K   )
–1
P
T1
T2
x
y
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 05 - Page 15 :
 258
PHYSICS
(d) If we obtained similar plots for 1.00×××××10–3 kg of hydrogen, would we get the same
value of PV/T  at the point where the curves meet on the y-axis? If not, what mass
of hydrogen yields the same value of PV/T  (for low pressure high temperature
region of the plot) ? (Molecular mass of H2 = 2.02 u, of O2 = 32.0 u,
R = 8.31 J mo1–1 K–1.)
12.4
12.4
12.4
12.4
12.4
An oxygen cylinder of volume 30 litre has an initial gauge pressure of 15 atm and a
temperature of 27 °C. After some oxygen is withdrawn from the cylinder, the gauge
pressure drops to 11 atm and its temperature drops to 17 °C. Estimate the mass of
oxygen taken out of the cylinder (R = 8.31 J mol–1 K–1, molecular mass of O2 = 32 u).
12.5
12.5
12.5
12.5
12.5
An air bubble of volume 1.0 cm3 rises from the bottom of a lake 40 m deep at a
temperature of 12 °C. To what volume does it grow when it reaches the surface,
which is at a temperature of 35 °C ?
12.6
12.6
12.6
12.6
12.6
Estimate the total number of air molecules (inclusive of oxygen, nitrogen, water
vapour and other constituents) in a room of capacity 25.0 m3 at a temperature of
27 °C and 1 atm pressure.
12.7
12.7
12.7
12.7
12.7
Estimate the average thermal energy of a helium atom at (i) room temperature
(27 °C), (ii) the temperature on the surface of the Sun (6000 K), (iii) the temperature
of 10 million kelvin (the typical core temperature in the case of a star).
12.8
12.8
12.8
12.8
12.8
Three vessels of equal capacity have gases at the same temperature and pressure. The
first vessel contains neon (monatomic), the second contains chlorine (diatomic),
and the third contains uranium hexafluoride (polyatomic). Do the vessels contain
equal number of respective molecules ? Is the root mean square speed of molecules
the same in the three cases? If not, in which case is vrms the largest ?
12.9
12.9
12.9
12.9
12.9
At what temperature is the root mean square speed of an atom in an argon gas
cylinder equal to the rms speed of a helium gas atom at – 20 °C ? (atomic mass of Ar
= 39.9 u, of He = 4.0 u).
12.10
12.10
12.10
12.10
12.10 Estimate the mean free path and collision frequency of a nitrogen molecule in a
cylinder containing nitrogen at 2.0 atm and temperature 17 0C. Take the radius of a
nitrogen molecule to be roughly 1.0 Å. Compare the collision time with the time the
molecule moves freely between two successive collisions (Molecular mass of
N2 = 28.0 u).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 1 :
 CHAPTER THIRTEEN
OSCILLATIONS
13.1
INTRODUCTION
In our daily life we come across various kinds of motions.
You have already learnt about some of them, e.g., rectilinear
motion and motion of a projectile. Both these motions are
non-repetitive. We have also learnt about uniform circular
motion and orbital motion of planets in the solar system. In
these cases, the motion is repeated after a certain interval of
time, that is, it is periodic. In your childhood, you must have
enjoyed rocking in a cradle or swinging on a swing. Both
these motions are repetitive in nature but different from the
periodic motion of a planet. Here, the object moves to and fro
about a mean position. The pendulum of a wall clock executes
a similar motion. Examples of such periodic to and fro
motion abound: a boat tossing up and down in a river, the
piston in a steam engine going back and forth, etc. Such a
motion is termed as oscillatory motion. In this chapter we
study this motion.
The study of oscillatory motion is basic to physics; its
concepts are required for the understanding of many physical
phenomena. In musical instruments, like the sitar, the guitar
or the violin, we come across vibrating strings that produce
pleasing sounds. The membranes in drums and diaphragms
in telephone and speaker systems vibrate to and fro about
their mean positions. The vibrations of air molecules make
the propagation of sound possible. In a solid, the atoms vibrate
about their equilibrium positions, the average energy of
vibrations being proportional to temperature. AC power
supply give voltage that oscillates alternately going positive
and negative about the mean value (zero).
The description of a periodic motion, in general, and
oscillatory motion, in particular, requires some fundamental
concepts, like period, frequency, displacement, amplitude
and phase. These concepts are developed in the next section.
13.1
Introduction
13.2
Periodic and oscillatory
motions
13.3
Simple harmonic motion
13.4
Simple harmonic motion
and uniform circular
motion
13.5
Velocity and acceleration
in simple harmonic motion
13.6
Force law for simple
harmonic motion
13.7
Energy in simple harmonic
motion
13.8
The simple pendulum
Summary
Points to ponder
Exercises
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 2 :
 PHYSICS
260
13.2
PERIODIC AND OSCILLATORY MOTIONS
Fig. 13.1 shows some periodic motions. Suppose
an insect climbs up a ramp and falls down, it
comes back to the initial point and repeats the
process identically. If you draw a graph of its
height above the ground versus time, it would
look something like Fig. 13.1 (a). If a child climbs
up a step, comes down, and repeats the process
identically, its height above the ground would
look like that in Fig. 13.1 (b). When you play the
game of bouncing a ball off the ground, between
your palm and the ground, its height versus time
graph would look like the one in Fig. 13.1 (c).
Note that both the curved parts in Fig. 13.1 (c)
are sections of a parabola given by the Newton’s
equation of motion (see section 2.6),
2
1
2
 +
gt
h = ut
 for downward motion, and
2
1
2
 –
gt
h = ut
 for upward motion,
with different values of u in each case. These
are examples of periodic motion. Thus, a motion
that repeats itself at regular intervals of time is
called periodic motion.
Fig. 13.1 Examples of periodic motion. The period T
is shown in each case.
Very often, the body undergoing periodic
motion has an equilibrium position somewhere
inside its path. When the body is at this position
no net external force acts on it. Therefore, if it is
left there at rest, it remains there forever. If the
body is given a small displacement from the
position, a force comes into play which tries to
bring the body back to the equilibrium point,
giving rise to oscillations or vibrations. For
example, a ball placed in a bowl will be in
equilibrium at the bottom. If displaced a little
from the point, it will perform oscillations in the
bowl. Every oscillatory motion is periodic, but
every periodic motion need not be oscillatory.
Circular motion is a periodic motion, but it is
not oscillatory.
There is no significant difference between
oscillations and vibrations. It seems that when
the frequency is small, we call it oscillation (like,
the oscillation of a branch of a tree), while when
the frequency is high, we call it vibration (like,
the vibration of a string of a musical instrument).
Simple harmonic motion is the simplest form
of oscillatory motion. This motion arises when
the force on the oscillating body is directly
proportional to its displacement from the mean
position, which is also the equilibrium position.
Further, at any point in its oscillation, this force
is directed towards the mean position.
In practice, oscillating bodies eventually
come to rest at their equilibrium positions
because of the damping due to friction and other
dissipative causes.  However, they can be forced
to remain oscillating by means of some external
periodic agency.  We discuss the phenomena of
damped and forced oscillations later in the
chapter.
Any material medium can be pictured as a
collection of a large number of coupled
oscillators. The collective oscillations of the
constituents of a medium manifest themselves
as waves. Examples of waves include water
waves, seismic waves, electromagnetic waves.
We shall study the wave phenomenon in the next
chapter.
13.2.1 Period and frequency
We have seen that any motion that repeats itself
at regular intervals of time is called periodic
motion. The smallest interval of time after
which the motion is repeated is called its
period. Let us denote the period by the symbol
T. Its SI unit is second. For periodic motions,
(a)
(b)
(c)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 3 :
 OSCILLATIONS
261
which are either too fast or too slow on the scale
of seconds, other convenient units of time are
used. The period of vibrations of a quartz crystal
is expressed in units of microseconds (10–6 s)
abbreviated as µs. On the other hand, the orbital
period of the planet Mercury is 88 earth days.
The Halley’s comet appears after every 76 years.
The reciprocal of T gives the number of
repetitions that occur per unit time. This
quantity is called the frequency of the periodic
motion. It is represented by the symbol ν. The
relation between ν and T is
ν  = 1/T
 
(13.1)
The unit of ν is thus s–1. After the discoverer of
radio waves, Heinrich Rudolph Hertz (1857–1894),
a special name has been given to the unit of
frequency. It is called hertz (abbreviated as Hz).
Thus,
1 hertz  = 1 Hz =1 oscillation per second =1 s–1
 
(13.2)
Note, that the frequency, ν, is not necessarily
an integer.
u Example 13.1  On an average, a human
heart is found to beat 75 times in a minute.
Calculate its frequency and period.
Answer  The beat frequency of heart = 75/(1 min)
     = 75/(60 s)
                                                    = 1.25 s–1
                                                    = 1.25 Hz
             The time period T         = 1/(1.25 s–1)
                                                    = 0.8 s
⊳
13.2.2   Displacement
In section 3.2, we defined displacement of a
particle as the change in its position vector. In
this chapter, we use the term displacement
in a more general sense. It refers to change
with time of any physical property under
consideration. For example, in case of rectilinear
motion of a steel ball on a surface, the distance
from the starting point as a function of time is
its position displacement. The choice of origin
is a matter of convenience. Consider a block
attached to a spring, the other end of the spring
is fixed to a rigid wall [see Fig.13.2(a)]. Generally,
it is convenient to measure displacement of the
body from its equilibrium position. For an
oscillating simple pendulum, the angle from the
vertical as a function of time may be regarded
as a displacement variable [see Fig.13.2(b)]. The
term displacement is not always to be referred
Fig. 13.2(a) A block attached to a spring, the other
end of which is fixed to a rigid wall. The
block moves on a frictionless surface. The
motion of the block can be described in
terms of its distance or displacement x
from the equilibrium position.
Fig.13.2(b) An oscillating simple pendulum; its
motion can be described in terms of
angular displacement θ from the vertical.
in the context of position only. There can be
many other kinds of displacement variables. The
voltage across a capacitor, changing with time
in an AC circuit, is also a displacement variable.
In the same way, pressure variations in time in
the propagation of sound wave, the changing
electric and magnetic fields in a light wave are
examples of displacement in different contexts.
The displacement variable may take both
positive and negative values. In experiments on
oscillations, the displacement is measured for
different times.
The displacement can be represented by a
mathematical function of time. In case of periodic
motion, this function is periodic in time. One of
the simplest periodic functions is given by
    f (t) = A cos ωt
(13.3a)
If the argument of this function, ωt, is
increased by an integral multiple of 2π radians,
the value of the function remains the same. The
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 4 :
 PHYSICS
262
function f (t) is then periodic and its period, T,
is given by
    
ω
π
2
= 
 
T
    (13.3b)
Thus, the function f (t) is periodic with period T,
f (t) = f (t+T )
The same result is obviously correct if we
consider a sine function, f (t ) = A sin ωt. Further,
a linear combination of sine and cosine functions
like,
       f (t)  =  A sin ωt + B cos ωt                 (13.3c)
is also a periodic function with the same period
T. Taking,
A = D cos φ  and  B = D sin φ
Eq. (13.3c) can be written as,
f (t) = D sin (ωt + φ ) ,                        (13.3d)
Here D and φ are constant given by
2
2
1
and
tan
φ =  
–
D = A + B  
  
B
A




The great importance of periodic sine and
cosine functions is due to a remarkable result
proved by the French mathematician, Jean
Baptiste Joseph Fourier (1768–1830): Any
periodic function can be expressed as a
superposition of sine and cosine functions
of different time periods with suitable
coefficients.
u Example 13.2   Which of the following
functions of time represent (a) periodic and
(b) non-periodic motion? Give the period for
each case of periodic motion [ω is any
positive constant].
(i)
sin ωt + cos ωt
(ii)
sin ωt + cos 2 ωt + sin 4 ωt
(iii)
e–ωt
(iv)
log (ωt)
Answer
(i)
sin ωt + cos ωt is a periodic function, it can
also be written as 
2  sin (ωt + π/4).
Now
2  sin (ωt + π/4)=
2  sin (ωt + π/4+2π)
       = 
2  sin [ω (t + 2π/ω) + π/4]
The periodic time of the function is 2π/ω.
(ii)
This is an example of a periodic motion. It
can be noted that each term represents a
periodic function with a different angular
frequency. Since period is the least interval
of time after which a function repeats its
value, sin ωt has a period T0= 2π/ω ; cos 2 ωt
has a period π/ω =T0/2; and sin 4 ωt has a
period 2π/4ω = T0/4. The period of the first
term is a multiple of the periods of the last
two terms. Therefore, the smallest interval
of time after which the sum of the three
terms repeats is T0, and thus, the sum is a
periodic function with a period 2π/ω.
(iii)
The function e–ωt is not periodic, it
decreases monotonically with increasing
time and tends to zero as t → ∞ and thus,
never repeats its value.
(iv)
The 
function 
log(ωt) 
increases
monotonically with time t. It, therefore,
never repeats its value and is a non-
periodic function. It may be noted that as
t → ∞, log(ωt) diverges to ∞. It, therefore,
cannot represent any kind of physical
displacement.
              ⊳
13.3
SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION
Consider a particle oscillating back and forth
about the origin of an x-axis between the limits
+A and –A as shown in Fig. 13.3. This oscillatory
motion is said to be simple harmonic if the
displacement x of the particle from the origin
varies with time as :
x (t) = A cos (ω t + φ)
(13.4)
Fig. 13.3
A particle vibrating back and forth about
the origin of x-axis, between the limits +A
and –A.
where A, ω and φ are constants.
Thus, simple harmonic motion (SHM) is not
any periodic motion but one in which
displacement is a sinusoidal function of time.
Fig. 13.4 shows the positions of a particle
executing SHM at discrete value of time, each
interval of time being T/4, where T is the period
of motion. Fig. 13.5 plots the graph of x versus t,
which gives the values of displacement as a
continuous function of time. The quantities A,
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 5 :
 OSCILLATIONS
263
ω and φ which characterize a given SHM have
standard names, as summarised in Fig. 13.6.
Let us understand these quantities.
The amplitutde A of SHM is the magnitude
of maximum displacement of the particle.
[Note, A can be taken to be positive without
any loss of generality]. As the cosine function
of time varies from +1 to –1, the displacement
varies between the extremes A and – A. Two
simple harmonic motions may have same ω
and φ but different amplitudes A and B, as
shown in Fig. 13.7 (a).
While the amplitude A is fixed for a given
SHM, the state of motion (position and velocity)
of the particle at any time t is determined by the
Fig. 13.4
The location of the particle in SHM at the
discrete values t = 0, T/4, T/2, 3T/4, T,
5T/4. The time after which motion repeats
itself is T. T will remain fixed, no matter
what location you choose as the initial (t =
0) location. The speed is maximum for zero
displacement (at x = 0) and zero at the
extremes of motion.
Fig. 13.5
Displacement as a continuous function of
time for simple harmonic motion.
Fig. 13.7 (b) A plot obtained from Eq. (13.4). The
curves 3 and 4 are for φ = 0 and -π/4
respectively. The amplitude A is same for
both the plots.
Fig. 13.7 (a) A plot of displacement as a function of
time as obtained from Eq. (14.4) with
φ = 0. The curves 1 and 2 are for two
different amplitudes A and B.
x (t)
: displacement x as a function of time t
A
: amplitude
ω
: angular frequency
ωt + φ : phase (time-dependent)
φ
: phase constant
Fig. 13.6  The meaning of standard symbols
in Eq. (13.4)
argument (ωt + φ) in the cosine function. This
time-dependent quantity, (ωt + φ) is called the
phase of the motion. The value of plase at t = 0
is φ and is called the phase constant (or phase
angle). If the amplitude is known, φ can be
determined from the displacement at t = 0. Two
simple harmonic motions may have the same A
and ω but different phase angle φ, as shown in
Fig. 13.7 (b).
Finally, the quantity ω can be seen to be
related to the period of motion T. Taking, for
simplicity, φ = 0 in Eq. (13.4), we have
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 6 :
 PHYSICS
264
x(t) = A cos ωt
 
 
(13.5)
Since the motion has a period T, x (t) is equal to
x (t + T). That is,
A cos ωt = A cos ω (t + T )      (13.6)
Now the cosine function is periodic with period
2π, i.e., it first repeats itself when the argument
changes by 2π. Therefore,
ω(t + T ) = ωt + 2π
that is ω = 2π/ T
(13.7)
ω is called the angular frequency of SHM. Its
S.I. unit is radians per second. Since the
frequency of oscillations is simply 1/T, ω is 2π
times the frequency of oscillation. Two simple
harmonic motions may have the same A and φ,
but different ω, as seen in Fig. 13.8. In this plot
the curve (b) has half the period and twice the
frequency of the curve (a).
This function represents a simple harmonic
motion having a period T = 2π/ω and a
phase angle (–π/4) or (7π/4)
(b)
sin2 ωt
= ½ – ½ cos 2 ωt
The function is periodic having a period
T = π/ω. It also represents a harmonic
motion with the point of equilibrium
occurring at ½ instead of zero.                      ⊳
13.4  SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION AND
UNIFORM CIRCULAR MOTION
In this section, we show that the projection of
uniform circular motion on a diameter of the
circle follows simple harmonic motion. A
simple experiment (Fig. 13.9) helps us visualise
this connection. Tie a ball to the end of a string
and make it move in a horizontal plane about
a fixed point with a constant angular speed.
The ball would then perform a uniform circular
motion in the horizontal plane. Observe the
ball sideways or from the front, fixing your
attention in the plane of motion. The ball will
appear to execute to and fro motion along a
horizontal line with the point of rotation as
the midpoint. You could alternatively observe
the shadow of the ball on a wall which is
perpendicular to the plane of the circle. In this
process what we are observing is the motion
of the ball on a diameter of the circle normal
to the direction of viewing.
Fig. 13.9
Circular motion of a ball in a plane viewed
edge-on is SHM.
Fig. 13.8   Plots of Eq. (13.4) for φ  = 0 for two different
periods.
u Example 13.3  Which of the following
functions of time represent (a) simple
harmonic motion and (b) periodic but not
simple harmonic? Give the period for each
case.
(1)
sin ωt – cos ωt
(2)
sin2 ωt
Answer
(a)
sin ωt – cos ωt
= sin ωt – sin (π/2 – ωt)
= 2 cos (π/4)  sin (ωt – π/4)
                   = √2 sin (ωt – π/4)
Fig. 13.10 describes the same situation
mathematically. Suppose a particle P is moving
uniformly on a circle of radius A with angular
speed ω. The sense of rotation is anticlockwise.
The initial position vector of the particle, i.e.,
the vector OP  at t = 0 makes an angle of φ with
the positive direction of x-axis. In time t, it will
cover a further angle ωt and its position vector
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 7 :
 OSCILLATIONS
265
will make an angle of ωt + φ with the +ve
x-axis. Next, consider the projection of the
position vector OP on the x-axis. This will be
OP′. The position of P′ on the x-axis, as the
particle P moves on the circle, is given by
x(t) =  A cos (ωt + φ )
which is the defining equation of SHM. This
shows that if P moves uniformly on a circle,
its projection P′ on a diameter of the circle
executes SHM. The particle P and the circle
on which it moves are sometimes referred to
as the reference particle and the reference circle,
respectively.
We can take projection of the motion of P on
any diameter, say the y-axis. In that case, the
displacement y(t) of P′ on the y-axis is given by
y = A sin (ωt + φ )
which is also an SHM of the same amplitude
as that of the projection on x-axis, but differing
by a phase of π/2.
In spite of this connection between circular
motion and SHM, the force acting on a particle
in linear simple harmonic motion is very
different from the centripetal force needed to
keep a particle in uniform circular motion.
u Example 13.4   The figure given below
depicts two circular motions. The radius
of the circle, the period of revolution, the
initial position and the sense of revolution
are indicated in the figures. Obtain the
simple harmonic motions of the
x-projection of the radius vector of the
rotating particle P in each case.
Answer
(a)
At t = 0, OP makes an angle of 45o = π/4 rad
with the (positive direction of) x-axis. After
time t, it covers an angle 
t
T
π
2
 in the
anticlockwise sense, and makes an angle
of  
4
 
+
 
2
π
πt
T
  with the x-axis.
The projection of OP on the x-axis at time t
is given by,
x (t) = A cos 2
 + 4
π
π
T t




For T = 4 s,
x(t) = A cos  2
4
 + 4
π
π
t




which is a SHM of amplitude A, period 4 s,
and an initial phase* = 
4
π
 .
* The natural unit of angle is radian, defined through the ratio of arc to radius. Angle is a dimensionless
quantity. Therefore it is not always necessary to mention the unit ‘radian’ when we use π, its multiples
or submultiples. The conversion between radian and degree is not similar to that between metre and
centimetre or mile. If the argument of a trigonometric function is stated without units, it is understood
that the unit is radian. On the other hand, if degree is to be used as the unit of angle, then it must be
shown explicitly. For example, sin(150) means sine of 15 degree, but sin(15) means sine of 15 radians.
Hereafter, we will often drop ‘rad’ as the unit, and it should be understood that whenever angle is
mentioned as a numerical value, without units, it is to be taken as radians.
Fig. 13.10
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 8 :
 PHYSICS
266
(b)
In this case at t = 0, OP makes an angle of
90o = 
2
π  with the x-axis. After a time t, it
covers an angle of 2 t
T
π
 in the clockwise
sense and makes an angle of  π
π
2  2
−




T t
with the x-axis. The projection of OP on the
x-axis at time t is given by
x(t) = B cos π
π
2  2
−




T t
= B sin 2π
T t




For T = 30 s,
           x(t) = B sin 
π
15 t




Writing this as x (t) = B cos 
π
π
15   2
t −



, and
comparing with Eq. (13.4).  We find that this
represents a SHM of amplitude B, period 30 s,
and an initial phase of 
2
π
−
.
⊳
13.5
VELOCITY AND ACCELERATION IN
SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION
The speed of a particle v in uniform circular
motion is its angular speed ω times the radius
of the circle A.
v = ω A
     (13.8)
The direction of velocity v at a time t is along
the tangent to the circle at the point where the
particle is located at that instant. From the
geometry of Fig. 13.11, it is clear that the velocity
of the projection particle P′ at time t is
v(t) = –ωA sin (ωt + φ )              (13.9)
where the negative sign shows that v (t) has a
direction opposite to the positive direction of
x-axis. Eq. (13.9) gives the instantaneous
velocity of a particle executing SHM, where
displacement is given by Eq. (13.4). We can, of
course, obtain this equation without using
geometrical argument, directly by differentiating
(Eq. 13.4) with respect of t:
d
( )
d
v(t) = 
x t
t
(13.10)
The method of reference circle can be similarly
used for obtaining instantaneous acceleration
of a particle undergoing SHM. We know that the
centripetal acceleration of a particle P in uniform
circular motion has a magnitude v2/A or ω2A,
and it is directed towards the centre i.e., the
direction is along PO. The instantaneous
acceleration of the projection particle P′ is then
(See Fig. 13.12)
a (t)  = –ω2A cos (ωt + φ)
               = –ω2x (t)
(13.11)
Fig. 13.11
The velocity, v (t), of the particle P′ is
the projection of the velocity v of the
reference particle, P.
Fig. 13.12
The acceleration, a(t), of the particle P′ is
the projection of the acceleration a of the
reference particle P.
Eq. (13.11) gives the acceleration of a particle
in SHM. The same equation can again be
obtained directly by differentiating velocity v(t)
given by Eq. (13.9) with respect to time:
d
( )
( )
d
a t  = 
v t
t
(13.12)
We note from Eq. (13.11) the important
property that acceleration of a particle in SHM
is proportional to displacement. For x(t) > 0,
a(t) < 0 and for  x(t) < 0, a(t) > 0. Thus, whatever
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 9 :
 OSCILLATIONS
267
the value of x between –A and A, the acceleration
a(t) is always directed towards the centre.
For simplicity, let us put φ = 0 and write the
expression for x (t), v (t) and a(t)
x(t) = A cos ωt, v(t) = – ω Asin ωt, a(t)=–ω2 A cos ωt
The corresponding plots are shown in Fig. 13.13.
All quantities vary sinusoidally with time; only
their maxima differ and the different plots differ
in phase. x varies between –A to A; v(t) varies
from –ωA to ωA and a(t) from –ω2A to ω2A. With
respect to displacement plot, velocity plot has a
phase difference of π/2 and acceleration plot has
a phase difference of π.
(b)
Using Eq. (13.9), the speed of the body
= – (5.0 m)(2π s–1) sin [(2π s–1) ×1.5 s
+ π/4]
= – (5.0 m)(2π s–1) sin [(3π + π/4)]
       = 10π × 0.707 m s–1
       = 22 m s–1
(c)
Using Eq.(13.10), the acceleration of the
body
= –(2π s–1)2 × displacement
           = – (2π s–1)2 × (–3.535 m)
           = 140 m s–2
⊳
13.6
FORCE LAW FOR SIMPLE HARMONIC
MOTION
Using Newton’s second law of motion, and the
expression for acceleration of a particle
undergoing SHM (Eq. 13.11), the force acting
on a particle of mass m in SHM is
F (t )  = ma
    = –mω2 x (t)
i.e., F (t)  = –k x (t)
(13.13)
where  k = mω2
(13.14a)
or
ω =  
k
m
(13.14b)
Like acceleration, force is always directed
towards the mean position—hence it is sometimes
called the restoring force in SHM. To summarise
the discussion so far, simple harmonic motion can
be defined in two equivalent ways, either by Eq.
(13.4) for displacement or by Eq. (13.13) that gives
its force law. Going from Eq. (13.4) to Eq. (13.13)
required us to differentiate two times. Likewise,
by integrating the force law Eq. (13.13) two times,
we can get back Eq. (13.4).
Note that the force in Eq. (13.13) is linearly
proportional to x(t). A particle oscillating under
such a force is, therefore, calling a linear
harmonic oscillator. In the real world, the force
may contain small additional terms proportional
to x2, x3, etc. These then are called non-linear
oscillators.
u Example 13.6 Two identical springs of
spring constant k are attached to a block
of mass m and to fixed supports as shown
in Fig. 13.14. Show that when the mass is
displaced from its equilibrium position on
either side, it executes a simple harmonic
motion. Find the period of oscillations.
Fig. 13.13 Displacement, velocity and acceleration of
a particle in simple harmonic motion have
the same period T, but they differ in phase
u Example 13.5  A body oscillates with SHM
according to the equation (in SI units),
     x = 5 cos [2π t + π/4].
At t = 1.5 s, calculate the (a) displacement,
(b) speed and (c) acceleration of the body.
Answer The angular frequency ω of the body
= 2π s–1 and its time period T = 1 s.
At t = 1.5 s
(a)
displacement = (5.0 m) cos [(2π s–1)×
1.5 s + π/4]
= (5.0 m) cos [(3π + π/4)]
= –5.0 × 0.707 m
= –3.535 m
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 10 :
 PHYSICS
268
Fig. 13.14
Answer Let the mass be displaced by a small
distance x to the right side of the equilibrium
position, as shown in Fig. 13.15. Under this
situation the spring on the left side gets
Fig. 13.15
elongated by a length equal to x and that on
the right side gets compressed by the same
length. The forces acting on the mass are
then,
F1   = –k x (force exerted by the spring on
the left side, trying to pull the
mass towards the mean
position)
F2   =  –k x (force exerted by the spring on
the right side, trying to push the
mass towards the mean
position)
The net force, F, acting on the mass is then
given by,
F   = –2kx
Hence the force acting on the mass is
proportional to the displacement and is directed
towards the mean position; therefore, the motion
executed by the mass is simple harmonic. The
time period of oscillations is,
T = 2  
m
2k
π
⊳
13.7 ENERGY IN SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION
Both kinetic and potential energies of a particle
in SHM vary between zero and their maximum
values.
In section 13.5 we have seen that the velocity
of a particle executing SHM, is a periodic
function of time. It is zero at the extreme positions
of displacement. Therefore, the kinetic energy (K)
of such a particle, which is defined as
2
2
1 mv
 
= 
 
K
2
2
2
1
sin (
+ )
2
= 
m 
A  
t  
ω
ω
φ
2
 
1
sin (
+ )
2
2
=  k A
t 
ω
φ
    (13.15)
is also a periodic function of time, being zero
when the displacement is maximum and
maximum when the particle is at the mean
position. Note, since the sign of v is immaterial
in K, the period of K is T/2.
What is the potential energy (U) of a particle
executing simple harmonic motion? In
Chapter 6, we have seen that the concept of
potential energy is possible only for conservative
forces. The spring force F = –kx is a conservative
force, with associated potential energy
2
1
2
U = k x
(13.16)
Hence the potential energy of a particle
executing simple harmonic motion is,
U(x)  =   
2
2
1
x
 
k
 
         
2
2
 
1
cos (
+ )
2
= k A
t 
ω
φ
 (13.17)
Thus, the potential energy of a particle
executing simple harmonic motion is also
periodic, with period T/2, being zero at the mean
position and maximum at the extreme
displacements.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 11 :
 OSCILLATIONS
269
It follows from Eqs. (13.15) and (13.17) that
the total energy, E, of the system is,
E  = U + K
2
2
2
2
 
 
1
1
cos (
+ ) + 
sin (
+ )
2
2
=  k A
t 
 k A
t 
ω
φ
ω
φ
2
2
2
1
cos (
+ ) + sin (
+ )
2
=  k A
t 
t 
ω
φ
ω
φ




Using the familiar trigonometric identity, the
value of the expression in the brackets is unity.
Thus,
2
1
2
E =  k A
(13.18)
The total mechanical energy of a harmonic
oscillator is thus independent of time as
expected for motion under any conservative
force. The time and displacement dependence
of the potential and kinetic energies of a
linear simple harmonic oscillator are shown
in Fig. 13.16.
Observe that both kinetic energy and
potential energy in SHM are seen to be always
positive in Fig. 13.16. Kinetic energy can, of
course, be never negative, since it is
proportional to the square of speed. Potential
energy is positive by choice of the undermined
constant in potential energy. Both kinetic
energy and potential energy peak twice during
each period of SHM. For x = 0, the energy is
kinetic; at the extremes x = ±A, it is all
potential energy. In the course of motion
between these limits, kinetic energy increases
at the expense of potential energy or
vice-versa.
u Example 13.7  A block whose mass is 1 kg
is fastened to a spring. The spring has a
spring constant of 50 N m–1. The block is
pulled to a distance x = 10 cm from its
equilibrium position at x = 0 on a frictionless
surface from rest at t = 0. Calculate the
kinetic, potential and total energies of the
block when it is 5 cm away from the mean
position.
Answer The block executes SHM, its angular
frequency, as given by Eq. (13.14b), is
ω =  
k
m
 =  
50 N m– 1
1kg
             = 7.07 rad s–1
Its displacement at any time t is then given by,
x(t) = 0.1 cos (7.07t)
Therefore, when the particle is 5 cm away from
the mean position, we have
0.05 = 0.1 cos (7.07t)
Fig. 13.16 Kinetic energy, potential energy and total
energy as a function of time [shown in (a)]
and displacement [shown in (b)] of a particle
in SHM. The kinetic energy and potential
energy both repeat after a period T/2. The
total energy remains constant at all t or x.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 12 :
 PHYSICS
270
let it go. The stone executes a to and fro motion,
it is periodic with a period of about two seconds.
We shall show that this periodic motion is
simple harmonic for small displacements from
Or
cos (7.07t) = 0.5 and hence
sin (7.07t)  =
3
2
  = 0.866
Then, the velocity of the block at x = 5 cm is
      = 0.1 × 7.07 × 0.866 m s–1
          = 0.61 m s–1
Hence the K.E. of the block,
 
2
1
 
=
 
2
 
 
v
m
           = ½[1kg × (0.6123 m s–1 )2 ]
           = 0.19 J
The P.E. of the block,
 
 
2
1
 
=
 
2
x
 
k
 
           = ½(50 N m–1 × 0.05 m × 0.05 m)
           = 0.0625 J
The total energy of the block at x = 5 cm,
           =  K.E. + P.E.
           =  0.25 J
we also know that at maximum displacement,
K.E. is zero and hence the total energy of the
system is equal to the P.E. Therefore, the total
energy of the system,
          = ½(50 N m–1 ×  0.1 m × 0.1 m )
          = 0.25 J
which is same as the sum of the two energies at
a displacement of 5 cm. This is in conformity
with the principle of conservation of energy.   ⊳
13.8 The Simple Pendulum
It is said that Galileo measured the periods of a
swinging chandelier in a church by his pulse
beats. He observed that the motion of the
chandelier was periodic. The system is a kind
of pendulum. You can also make your own
pendulum by tying a piece of stone to a long
unstretchable thread, approximately 100 cm
long.  Suspend your pendulum from a suitable
support so that it is free to oscillate. Displace
the stone to one side by a small distance and
(a)
 (b)
Fig. 13.17
(a) A bob oscillating about its mean
position. (b) The radial force T-mg cosθ
provides centripetal force but no torque
about the support. The tangential force
mg sinθ provides the restoring torque.
the mean position. Consider simple pendulum
— a small bob of mass m tied to an inextensible
massless string of length L. The other end of
the string is fixed to a rigid support. The bob
oscillates in a plane about the vertical line
through the support. Fig. 13.17(a) shows this
system. Fig. 13.17(b) is a kind of ‘free-body’
diagram of the simple pendulum showing the
forces acting on the bob.
Let θ be the angle made by the string with
the vertical. When the bob is at the mean
position, θ = 0
There are only two forces acting on the bob;
the tension T along the string and the vertical
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 13 :
 OSCILLATIONS
271
force due to gravity (=mg). The force mg can be
resolved into the component mg cosθ along the
string and mg sinθ perpendicular to it. Since
the motion of the bob is along a circle of length
L and centre at the support point, the bob has
a radial acceleration (ω2L) and also a tangental
acceleration; the latter arises since motion along
the arc of the circle is not uniform. The radial
acceleration is provided by the net radial force
T –mg cosθ, while the tangential acceleration is
provided by mg sinθ. It is more convenient to
work with torque about the support since the
radial force gives zero torque. Torque τ about
the support is entirely provided by the tangental
component of force
τ =  –L (mg sinθ )
(13.19)
This is the restoring torque that tends to reduce
angular displacement — hence the negative
sign. By Newton’s law of rotational motion,
τ   =  I α
(13.20)
where I is the moment of inertia of the system
about the support and α is the angular
acceleration. Thus,
I α = –m g sin θ   L
(13.21)
Or,
α  =  
sin  
m g L
 
 
I
 θ
−
(13.22)
We can simplify Eq. (13.22) if we assume that
the displacement θ is small. We know that sin θ
can be expressed as,
sin
 ± ...
3!
5!
  
θ
θ
θ
θ
3
5
  =  −
+
(13.23)
where θ is in radians.
Now if θ  is small, sin θ can be approximated
by θ and Eq. (13.22) can then be written as,
 α
θ
  =  −
 
mgL
I
 
(13.24)
In Table 13.1, we have listed the angle θ in
degrees, its equivalent in radians, and the
value of the function sin θ . From this table it
can be seen that for θ as large as 20 degrees,
sin θ is nearly the same as θ expressed
in radians.
Table 13.1  sin θθθθθ as ma function of angle θθθθθ
(degrees)
(radians)
sin
Equation (13.24) is mathematically, identical to
Eq. (13.11) except that the variable is angular
displacement. Hence we have proved that for
small q, the motion of the bob is simple harmonic.
From Eqs. (13.24) and (13.11),
ω  = 
 
mgL
I
 
and
 
I
T
 
mgL
π
  = 2  
 
    (13.25)
Now since the string of the simple pendulum
is massless, the moment of inertia I is simply
mL2. Eq. (13.25) then gives the well-known
formula for time period of a simple pendulum.
L
T
 
g
π
  =  2  
 
  (13.26)
u Example 13.8 What is the length of a
simple pendulum, which ticks seconds ?
Answer From Eq. (13.26), the time period of a
simple pendulum is given by,
 
L
T
 
g
π
  =  2  
 
From this relation one gets,
2
2  
4
gT
L
π
  =  
 
The time period of a simple pendulum, which
ticks seconds, is 2 s. Therefore, for g = 9.8 m s–2
and T  = 2 s, L is
–2
2
2
9.8(m s
)
4(s )  
4
  
π
×
 =  
 
 = 1 m
⊳
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 14 :
 PHYSICS
272
SUMMARY
1.
The motion that repeats itself is called periodlic motion.
2.
The period T is the time reequired for one complete oscillation, or cycle. It is related to
the frequency v by,
1
T
v
=
The frequency ν of periodic or oscillatory motion is the number of oscillations per
unit time. In the SI, it is measured in hertz :
                      1 hertz = 1 Hz = 1 oscillation per second = 1s–1
3.
In simple harmonic motion (SHM), the displacement x (t) of a particle from its
equilibrium position is given by,
x (t)  = A cos (ωt + φ )
(displacement),
in which A  is the amplitude of the displacement, the quantity  (ωt + φ ) is the phase of
the motion, and φ is the phase constant. The angular frequency ω is related to the
period and frequency of the motion by,
                         
2
2
  
  
T
π
ω
πν
=
=
(angular frequency).
4.
Simple harmonic motion can also be viewed as the projection of uniform circular
motion on the diameter of the circle in which the latter motion occurs.
5.
The particle velocity and acceleration during SHM as functions of time are given by,
v (t)  =  –ωA sin (ωt + φ )            (velocity),
                        a (t)  =  –ω2A cos (ωt + φ )
                                = –ω2x (t)                            (acceleration),
Thus we see that both velocity and acceleration of a body executing simple harmonic
motion are periodic functions, having the velocity amplitude vm=ω A  and acceleration
amplitude am =ω 2A, respectively.
6.
The force acting in a simple harmonic motion is proportional to the displacement and
is always directed towards the centre of motion.
7.
A particle executing simple harmonic motion has, at any time, kinetic energy
K = ½ mv2  and potential energy U = ½ kx2.  If no friction is present the mechanical
energy of the system, E = K + U always remains constant even though K and U change
with time.
8.
A particle of mass m oscillating under the influence of Hooke’s law restoring force
given by F = – k x exhibits simple harmonic motion with
ω 
k
m
=
(angular frequency)
2
m
T 
k
π
=
(period)
Such a system is also called a linear oscillator.
9.
The motion of a simple pendulum swinging through small angles is approximately
simple harmonic. The period of oscillation is given by,
2
L
T
g
π
=
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 15 :
 OSCILLATIONS
273
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
The period T is the least time after which motion repeats itself.  Thus, motion repeats
itself after nT where n is an integer.
2.
Every periodic motion is not simple harmonic motion. Only that periodic motion
governed by the force law F = – k x is simple harmonic.
3.
Circular motion can arise due to an inverse-square law force (as in planetary motion)
as well as due to simple harmonic force in two dimensions equal to: –mω2r.  In the
latter case, the phases of motion, in two perpendicular directions (x and y) must differ
by π/2. Thus, for example, a particle subject to a force  –mω2r with initial position (0,
A) and velocity (ωA, 0) will move uniformly in a circle of radius A.
4.
For linear simple harmonic motion with a given ω, two initial conditions are necessary
and sufficient to determine the motion completely.  The  initial  conditions may be (i)
initial position and initial velocity or (ii) amplitude and phase or (iii) energy
and phase.
5.
From point 4 above, given  amplitude or energy, phase of motion is determined by the
initial position or initial velocity.
6.
A combination of two simple harmonic motions with arbitrary amplitudes and phases
is not necessarily periodic.  It is periodic only if frequency of one motion is an integral
multiple of the other’s frequency.  However, a periodic motion can always be expressed
as a sum of infinite number of harmonic motions with appropriate amplitudes.
7.
The period of SHM does not depend on amplitude or energy or the phase constant.
Contrast this with the periods of planetary orbits under gravitation (Kepler’s third law).
8.
The motion of a simple pendulum is simple harmonic for small angular displacement.
9.
For motion of a particle to be simple harmonic, its displacement x must be expressible
in either of the following forms :
x = A cos ωt  +  B sin ωt
x = A cos (ωt + α ), x =  B sin (ωt + β )
The three forms are completely equivalent (any one can be expressed in terms of any
other two forms).
Thus, damped simple harmonic motion is not strictly simple harmonic. It is
approximately so only for time intervals much less than 2m/b where b is the damping
constant.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 16 :
 PHYSICS
274
Exercises
13.1
Which of the following examples represent periodic motion?
(a)
A swimmer completing one (return) trip from one bank of a river to the other
and back.
(b)
A freely suspended bar magnet displaced from its N-S direction and released.
(c)
A hydrogen molecule rotating about its centre of mass.
(d)
An arrow released from a bow.
13.2
Which of the following examples represent (nearly) simple harmonic motion and
which represent periodic but not simple harmonic motion?
(a)
the rotation of earth about its axis.
(b)
motion of an oscillating mercury column in a U-tube.
(c)
motion of a ball bearing inside a smooth curved bowl, when released from a
point slightly above the lower most point.
(d)
general vibrations of a polyatomic molecule about its equilibrium position.
13.3
Fig. 13.18 depicts four x-t plots for linear motion of a particle. Which of the plots
represent periodic motion? What is the period of motion (in case of periodic motion) ?
Fig. 18.18
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 17 :
 OSCILLATIONS
275
13.4
Which of the following functions of time represent (a) simple harmonic, (b) periodic
but not simple harmonic, and (c) non-periodic motion? Give period for each case of
periodic motion (ω is any positive constant):
(a)
sin ωt – cos ωt
(b)
sin3 ωt
(c)
3 cos (π/4 – 2ωt)
(d)
cos ωt + cos 3ωt + cos 5ωt
(e)
exp (–ω2t2)
(f)
1 + ωt + ω2t2
13.5
A particle is in linear simple harmonic motion between two points, A and B, 10 cm
apart. Take the direction from A to B as the positive direction and give the signs of
velocity, acceleration and force on the particle when it is
(a)
at the end A,
(b)
at the end B,
(c)
at the mid-point of AB going towards A,
(d)
at 2 cm away from B going towards A,
(e)
at 3 cm away from A going towards B, and
(f)
at 4 cm away from B going towards A.
13.6
Which of the following relationships between the acceleration a and the displacement
x of a particle involve simple harmonic motion?
(a)
a = 0.7x
(b)
a = –200x2
(c)
a = –10x
(d)
a = 100x3
13.7
The motion of a particle executing simple harmonic motion is described by the
displacement function,
                 x(t) = A cos (ωt + φ ).
If the initial (t = 0) position of the particle is 1 cm and its initial velocity is ω cm/s,
what are its amplitude and initial phase angle ? The angular frequency of the particle
is π s–1. If instead of the cosine function, we choose the sine function to describe the
SHM : x = B sin (ωt + α), what are the amplitude and initial phase of the particle
with the above initial conditions.
13.8
A spring balance has a scale that reads from 0 to 50 kg. The length of the scale is 20
cm. A body suspended from this balance, when displaced and released, oscillates
with a period of 0.6 s. What is the weight of the body ?
13.9
A spring having with a spring constant 1200 N m–1 is mounted on a horizontal table
as shown in Fig. 13.19. A mass of 3 kg is attached to the free end of the spring. The
mass is then pulled sideways to a distance of 2.0 cm and released.
Fig. 13.19
Determine (i) the frequency of oscillations, (ii)  maximum acceleration of the mass,
and (iii) the maximum speed of the mass.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 18 :
 PHYSICS
276
13.10
In Exercise 13.9, let us take the position of mass when the spring is unstreched as
x = 0, and the direction from left to right as the positive direction of
x-axis. Give x as a function of time t for the oscillating mass if at the moment we
start the stopwatch (t = 0), the mass is
(a)
at the mean position,
(b)
at the maximum stretched position, and
(c)
at the maximum compressed position.
In what way do these functions for SHM differ from each other, in frequency, in
amplitude or the initial phase?
13.11
Figures 13.20 correspond to two circular motions. The radius of the circle, the
period of revolution, the initial position, and the sense of revolution (i.e. clockwise
or anti-clockwise) are indicated on each figure.
Fig. 13.20
Obtain the corresponding simple harmonic motions of the x-projection of the radius
vector of the revolving particle P, in each case.
13.12
Plot the corresponding reference circle for each of the following simple harmonic
motions. Indicate the initial (t =0) position of the particle, the radius of the circle,
and the angular speed of the rotating particle. For simplicity, the sense of rotation
may be fixed to be anticlockwise in every case: (x is in cm and t is in s).
(a)
x = –2 sin (3t + π/3)
(b)
x = cos (π/6 – t)
(c)
x = 3 sin (2πt + π/4)
(d)
x = 2 cos πt
13.13
Figure 13.21(a) shows a spring of force constant k clamped rigidly at one end and a
mass m attached to its free end. A force F applied at the free end stretches the
spring. Figure 13.21 (b) shows the same spring with both ends free and attached to
a mass m at either end. Each end of the spring in Fig. 13.21(b) is stretched by the
same force F.
Fig. 13.21
(a)
What is the maximum extension of the spring in the two cases ?
(b)
If the mass in Fig. (a) and the two masses in Fig. (b) are released, what is the
period of oscillation in each case ?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 06 - Page 19 :
 OSCILLATIONS
277
13.14
The piston in the cylinder head of a locomotive has a stroke (twice the amplitude)
of 1.0 m. If the piston moves with simple harmonic motion with an angular frequency
of 200 rad/min, what is its maximum speed ?
13.15
The acceleration due to gravity on the surface of moon is 1.7 m s–2. What is the time
period of a simple pendulum on the surface of moon if its time period on the surface
of earth is 3.5 s ? (g on the surface of earth is 9.8 m s–2)
13.16
A simple pendulum of length l and having a bob of mass M is suspended in a car.
The car is moving on a circular track of radius R with a uniform speed v. If the
pendulum makes small oscillations in a radial direction about its equilibrium
position, what will be its time period ?
13.17
A cylindrical piece of cork of density of base area A and height h floats in a liquid of
density ρl. The cork is depressed slightly and then released. Show that the cork
oscillates up and down simple harmonically with a period
                                     T
h
g
1
= 2π
ρ
ρ
where ρ is the density of cork. (Ignore damping due to viscosity of the liquid).
13.18
One end of a U-tube containing mercury is connected to a suction pump and the
other end to atmosphere. A small pressure difference is maintained between the
two columns. Show that, when the suction pump is removed, the column of mercury
in the U-tube executes simple harmonic motion.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 1 :
 CHAPTER FOURTEEN
WAVES
14.1
INTRODUCTION
In the previous Chapter, we studied the motion of objects
oscillating in isolation. What happens in a system, which is
a collection of such objects? A material medium provides
such an example. Here, elastic forces bind the constituents
to each other and, therefore, the motion of one affects that of
the other. If you drop a little pebble in a pond of still water,
the water surface gets disturbed. The disturbance does not
remain confined to one place, but propagates outward along
a circle. If you continue dropping pebbles in the pond, you
see circles rapidly moving outward from the point where the
water surface is disturbed. It gives a feeling as if the water is
moving outward from the point of disturbance. If you put
some cork pieces on the disturbed surface, it is seen that
the cork pieces move up and down but do not move away
from the centre of disturbance. This shows that the water
mass does not flow outward with the circles, but rather a
moving disturbance is created. Similarly, when we speak,
the sound moves outward from us, without any flow of air
from one part of the medium to another. The disturbances
produced in air are much less obvious and only our ears or
a microphone can detect them. These patterns, which move
without the actual physical transfer or flow of matter as a
whole, are called waves. In this Chapter, we will study such
waves.
Waves transport energy and the pattern of disturbance has
information that propagate from one point to another. All our
communications essentially depend on transmission of sig-
nals through waves. Speech means production of sound
waves in air and hearing amounts to their detection. Often,
communication involves different kinds of waves. For exam-
ple, sound waves may be first converted into an electric cur-
rent signal which in turn may generate an electromagnetic
wave that may be transmitted by an optical cable or via a
14.1
Introduction
14.2
Transverse and
longitudinal waves
14.3
Displacement relation in a
progressive wave
14.4
The speed of a travelling
wave
14.5
The principle of
superposition of waves
14.6
Reflection of waves
14.7
Beats
Summary
Points to ponder
Exercises
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 2 :
 WAVES
279
satellite. Detection of the original signal will usu-
ally involve these steps in reverse order.
Not all waves require a medium for their
propagation. We know that light waves can
travel through vacuum. The light emitted by
stars, which are hundreds of light years away,
reaches us through inter-stellar space, which
is practically a vacuum.
The most familiar type of waves such as waves
on a string, water waves, sound waves, seismic
waves, etc. is the so-called mechanical waves.
These waves require a medium for propagation,
they cannot propagate through vacuum. They
involve oscillations of constituent particles and
depend on the elastic properties of the medium.
The electromagnetic waves that you will learn
in Class XII are a different type of wave.
Electromagnetic waves do not necessarily require
a medium - they can travel through vacuum.
Light, radiowaves, X-rays, are all electromagnetic
waves. In vacuum, all electromagnetic waves
have the same speed c, whose value is :
c = 299, 792, 458 ms–1.
(14.1)
A third kind of wave is the so-called Matter
waves. They are associated with constituents of
matter : electrons, protons, neutrons, atoms and
molecules. They arise in quantum mechanical
description of nature that you will learn in your
later studies. Though conceptually more abstract
than mechanical or electro-magnetic waves, they
have already found applications in several
devices basic to modern technology; matter
waves associated with electrons are employed
in electron microscopes.
In this chapter we will study mechanical
waves, which require a material medium for
their propagation.
The aesthetic influence of waves on art and
literature is seen from very early times; yet the
first scientific analysis of wave motion dates back
to the seventeenth century. Some of the famous
scientists associated with the physics of wave
motion are Christiaan Huygens (1629-1695),
Robert Hooke and Isaac Newton. The
understanding of physics of waves followed the
physics of oscillations of masses tied to springs
and physics of the simple pendulum. Waves in
elastic media are intimately connected with
harmonic oscillations. (Stretched strings, coiled
springs, air, etc., are examples of elastic media).
We shall illustrate this connection through
simple examples.
Consider a collection of springs connected to
one another as shown in Fig. 14.1. If the spring
at one end is pulled suddenly and released, the
disturbance travels to the other end. What has
happened? The first spring is disturbed from its
equilibrium length. Since the second spring is
connected to the first, it is also stretched or
compressed, and so on. The disturbance moves
from one end to the other; but each spring only
executes small oscillations about its equilibrium
position. As a practical example of this situation,
consider a stationary train at a railway station.
Different bogies of the train are coupled to each
other through a spring coupling. When an
engine is attached at one end, it gives a push to
the bogie next to it; this push is transmitted from
one bogie to another without the entire train
being bodily displaced.
Now let us consider the propagation of sound
waves in air. As the wave passes through air, it
compresses or expands a small region of air. This
causes a change in the density of that region,
say δρ, this change induces a change in pressure,
δp, in that region. Pressure is force per unit area,
so there is a restoring force proportional to
the disturbance, just like in a spring. In this
case, the quantity similar to extension or
compression of the spring is the change in
density. If a region is compressed, the molecules
in that region are packed together, and they tend
to move out to the adjoining region, thereby
increasing the density or creating compression
in the adjoining region. Consequently, the air
in the first region undergoes rarefaction. If a
region is comparatively rarefied the surrounding
air will rush in making the rarefaction move to
the adjoining region. Thus, the compression or
rarefaction moves from one region to another,
making the propagation of a disturbance
possible in air.
Fig. 14.1 A collection of springs connected to each
other. The end A is pulled suddenly
generating a disturbance, which then
propagates to the other end.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 3 :
 PHYSICS
280
In solids, similar arguments can be made. In
a crystalline solid, atoms or group of atoms are
arranged in a periodic lattice. In these, each
atom or group of atoms is in equilibrium, due to
forces from the surrounding atoms. Displacing
one atom, keeping the others fixed, leads to
restoring forces, exactly as in a spring. So we
can think of atoms in a lattice as end points,
with springs between pairs of them.
In the subsequent sections of this chapter
we are going to discuss various characteristic
properties of waves.
14.2
TRANSVERSE AND LONGITUDINAL
WAVES
We have seen that motion of mechanical waves
involves oscillations of constituents of the
medium. If the constituents of the medium
oscillate perpendicular to the direction of wave
propagation, we call the wave a transverse wave.
If they oscillate along the direction of wave
propagation, we call the wave a longitudinal
wave.
Fig.14.2 shows the propagation of a single
pulse along a string, resulting from a single up
and down jerk. If the string is very long compared
position as the pulse or wave passes through
them. The oscillations are normal to the
direction of wave motion along the string, so this
is an example of transverse wave.
We can look at a wave in two ways. We can fix
an instant of time and picture the wave in space.
This will give us the shape of the wave as a
whole in space at a given instant. Another way
is to fix a location i.e. fix our attention on a
particular element of string and see its
oscillatory motion in time.
Fig. 14.4 describes the situation for
longitudinal waves in the most familiar example
of the propagation of sound waves. A long pipe
filled with air has a piston at one end. A single
sudden push forward and pull back of the piston
will generate a pulse of condensations (higher
density) and rarefactions (lower density) in the
medium (air). If the  push-pull of the piston is
continuous and periodic (sinusoidal), a
Fig. 14.3 A harmonic (sinusoidal) wave travelling
along a stretched string is an example of a
transverse wave. An element of the string
in the region of the wave oscillates about
its equilibrium position perpendicular to the
direction of wave propagation.
Fig. 14.2 When a pulse travels along the length of a
stretched string (x-direction), the elements
of the string oscillate up and down (y-
direction)
to the size of the pulse, the pulse will damp out
before it reaches the other end and reflection
from that end may be ignored. Fig. 14.3 shows a
similar situation, but this time the external
agent gives a continuous periodic sinusoidal up
and down jerk to one end of the string. The
resulting disturbance on the string is then a
sinusoidal wave. In either case the elements of
the string oscillate about their equilibrium mean
Fig. 14.4 Longitudinal waves (sound) generated in a
pipe filled with air by moving the piston up
and down. A volume element of air oscillates
in the direction parallel to the direction of
wave propagation.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 4 :
 WAVES
281
sinusoidal wave will be generated propagating
in air along the length of the pipe. This is clearly
an example of longitudinal waves.
The waves considered above, transverse or
longitudinal, are travelling or progressive waves
since they travel from one part of the medium
to another. The material medium as a whole
does not move, as already noted. A stream, for
example, constitutes motion of water as a whole.
In a water wave, it is the disturbance that moves,
not water as a whole. Likewise a wind (motion
of air as a whole) should not be confused with a
sound wave which is a propagation of
disturbance (in pressure density) in air, without
the motion of air medium as a whole.
In transverse waves, the particle motion is
normal to the direction of propagation of the
wave. Therefore, as the wave propagates, each
element of the medium undergoes a shearing
strain. Transverse waves can, therefore, be
propagated only in those media, which can
sustain shearing stress, such as solids and not
in fluids. Fluids, as well as, solids can sustain
compressive strain; therefore, longitudinal
waves can be propagated in all elastic media.
For example, in medium like steel, both
transverse and longitudinal waves can
propagate, while air can sustain only
longitudinal waves. The waves on the surface
of water are of two kinds: capillary waves and
gravity waves. The former are ripples of fairly
short wavelength—not more than a few
centimetre—and the restoring force that
produces them is the surface tension of water.
Gravity waves have wavelengths typically
ranging from several metres to several hundred
meters. The restoring force that produces these
waves is the pull of gravity, which tends to keep
the water surface at its lowest level. The
oscillations of the particles in these waves are
not confined to the surface only, but extend with
diminishing amplitude to the very bottom. The
particle motion in water waves involves a
complicated motion—they not only move up and
down but also back and forth. The waves in an
ocean are the combination of both longitudinal
and transverse waves.
It is found that, generally, transverse and
longitudinal waves travel with different speed
in the same medium.
u
u
u
u
u Example 14.1  Given below are some
examples of wave motion. State in each case
if the wave motion is transverse, longitudinal
or a combination of both:
(a)
Motion of a kink in a longitudinal spring
produced by displacing one end of the
spring sideways.
(b)
Waves produced in a cylinder
containing a liquid by moving its piston
back and forth.
(c)
Waves produced by a motorboat sailing
in water.
(d)
Ultrasonic waves in air produced by a
vibrating quartz crystal.
Answer
(a)
Transverse and longitudinal
(b)
Longitudinal
(c)
Transverse and longitudinal
(d)
Longitudinal
⊳
14.3
DISPLACEMENT RELATION IN
A  PROGRESSIVE WAVE
For mathematical description of  a travelling
wave, we need a function of both position x and
time t. Such a function at every instant should
give the shape of the wave at that instant. Also,
at every given location, it should describe the
motion of the constituent of the medium at that
location. If we wish to describe a sinusoidal
travelling wave (such as the one shown in Fig.
14.3) the corresponding function must also be
sinusoidal. For convenience, we shall take the
wave to be transverse so that if the position of
the constituents of the medium is denoted by x,
the displacement from the equilibrium position
may be denoted by y. A sinusoidal travelling
wave is then described by:
( , )
sin(
)
=
−ω + φ
y x t
a
kx
t
(14.2)
The term φ in the argument of sine function
means equivalently that we are considering a
linear combination of sine and cosine functions:
( , )
sin(
)
cos(
)
y x t
A
kx
t
B
kx
t
ω
ω
=
−
+
−
(14.3)
From Equations (14.2) and (14.3),
2
2
a
A
B
=
+
 and  
1
tan
φ
−
=
B
A




To understand why Equation (14.2)
represents a sinusoidal travelling wave, take a
fixed instant,  say t = t0. Then, the argument of
the sine function in Equation (14.2) is simply
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 5 :
 PHYSICS
282
kx + constant. Thus, the shape of the wave (at
any fixed instant) as a function of x  is a sine
wave. Similarly, take a fixed location, say x = x0.
Then, the argument of the sine function in
Equation (14.2) is constant -ωt. The
displacement y, at a fixed location, thus, varies
sinusoidally with time. That is, the constituents
of the medium at different positions execute
simple harmonic motion. Finally, as t increases,
x must increase in the positive direction to keep
kx – ωt + φ  constant. Thus, Eq. (14.2) represents
a sinusiodal (harmonic) wave travelling along
the positive direction of the x-axis. On the other
hand, a function
( , )
sin(
)
=
+ ω + φ
y x t
a
kx
t
 
(14.4)
represents a wave travelling in the negative
direction of x-axis. Fig. (14.5) gives the names of
the various physical quantities appearing in Eq.
(14.2) that we now interpret.
    Fig. 14.6 shows the plots of Eq. (14.2) for
different values of time differing by equal
intervals of time. In a wave, the crest is the
point of maximum positive displacement, the
trough is the point of maximum negative
displacement. To see how a wave travels, we
can fix attention on a crest and see how it
progresses with time. In the figure, this is
shown by a cross (×) on the crest. In the same
manner, we can see the motion of a particular
constituent of the medium at a fixed location,
say at the origin of the x-axis. This is shown
by a solid dot (•). The plots of Fig. 14.6 show
that with time, the solid dot (•) at the origin
moves periodically, i.e., the particle at the
origin oscillates about its mean position as
the wave progresses. This is true for any other
location also. We also see that during the time
the solid dot (•) has completed one full
oscillation, the crest has moved further by a
certain distance.
Using the plots of Fig. 14.6, we now define
the various quantities of Eq. (14.2).
14.3.1  Amplitude and Phase
In Eq. (14.2), since the sine function varies
between 1 and –1, the displacement y (x,t) varies
between a and –a. We can take a to be a positive
constant, without any loss of generality. Then,
a represents the maximum displacement of the
constituents of the medium from their
equilibrium position. Note that the displacement
y may be positive or negative, but a is positive.
It is called the amplitude of the wave.
The quantity (kx – ωt + φ) appearing as the
argument of the sine function in Eq. (14.2) is
called the phase of the wave. Given the
amplitude a, the phase determines the
displacement of the wave at any position and
at any instant. Clearly φ is the phase at x = 0
and t = 0. Hence, φ is called the initial phase
angle. By suitable choice of origin on the x-axis
and the intial time, it is possible to have φ = 0.
Thus there is no loss of generality in dropping
φ, i.e., in taking Eq. (14.2) with φ = 0.
Fig. 14.5 The meaning of standard symbols in
Eq. (14.2)
y(x,t)
:
displacement as a function of
position x and time t
a
:
amplitude of a wave
ω
:
angular frequency of the wave
k
:
angular wave number
kx–ωt+φ
:
initial phase angle (a+x = 0, t = 0)
Fig. 14.6 A harmonic wave progressing along the
positive direction of x-axis at different times.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 6 :
 WAVES
283
14.3.2  Wavelength and Angular Wave
Number
The minimum distance between two points
having the same phase is called the wavelength
of the wave, usually denoted by λ. For simplicity,
we can choose points of the same phase to be
crests or troughs. The wavelength is then the
distance between two consecutive crests or
troughs in a wave. Taking  φ = 0 in Eq. (14.2),
the displacement at  t = 0 is given by
( ,0)
sin
=
y x
a
kx
     (14.5)
Since the sine function repeats its value after
every 2π change in angle,
That is the displacements at points x and at
2n
x
k
π
+
are the same, where n=1,2,3,... The 1east
distance between points with the same
displacement (at any given instant of time) is
obtained by taking n = 1. λ is then given by
2
k
π
λ =
     or   
2
k
π
λ
=
    (14.6)
k is the angular wave number or propagation
constant; its SI unit is radian per metre or
1
 
rad m−*
14.3.3
Period, Angular Frequency and
Frequency
Fig. 14.7 shows again a sinusoidal plot. It
describes not the shape of the wave at a certain
instant but the displacement of an element (at
any fixed location) of the medium as a function
of time. We may for, simplicity, take Eq. (14.2)
with φ = 0 and monitor the motion of the element
say at 
0
x =
. We then get
(0, )
sin(
)
y
t
a
t
ω
=
−
   
sin
a
t
ω
= −
Now, the period of oscillation of the wave is the
time it takes for an element to complete one full
oscillation. That is
sin
sin
(
T)
a
t
a
t
ω
ω
−
= −
+
   
sin(
T)
a
t
ω
ω
= −
+
Since sine function repeats after every 2π,
T
2
ω
π
=
  or   
2
T
π
ω =
(14.7)
ω is called the angular frequency of the wave.
Its SI unit is rad s –1. The frequency ν is the
number of oscillations per second. Therefore,
1
T
2
ω
ν
π
=
=
 (14.8)
ν  is usually measured in hertz.
In the discussion above, reference has always
been made to a wave travelling along a string or
a transverse wave. In a longitudinal wave, the
displacement of an element of the medium is
parallel to the direction of propagation of the
wave. In Eq. (14.2), the displacement function
for a longitudinal wave is written as,
s(x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt + φ)
(14.9)
where s(x, t) is the displacement of an element
of the medium in the direction of propagation
of the wave at position x and time t. In Eq. (14.9),
a  is the displacement amplitude; other
quantities have the same meaning as in case
of a transverse wave except that the
displacement function y (x, t) is to be replaced
by the function s (x, t).
*
Here again, ‘radian’ could be dropped and the units could be written merely as m–1. Thus, k represents 2π
times the number of waves (or the total phase difference) that can be accommodated per unit length, with SI
units m–1.
Fig. 14.7 An element of a string at a fixed location
oscillates in time with amplitude a and
period T, as the wave passes over it.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 7 :
 PHYSICS
284
u
u
u
u
u Example 14.2  A wave travelling along a
string is described by,
y(x, t) = 0.005 sin (80.0 x – 3.0 t),
in which the numerical constants are in
SI units (0.005 m, 80.0 rad m–1, and
3.0 rad s–1). Calculate (a) the amplitude,
(b) the wavelength, and (c) the period and
frequency of the wave. Also, calculate the
displacement y of the wave at a distance
x = 30.0 cm and time t = 20 s ?
Answer  On comparing this displacement
equation with Eq. (14.2),
y (x, t) = a sin (kx –  ωt),
we find
(a)
the amplitude of the wave is 0.005 m = 5 mm.
(b)
the angular wave number k and angular
frequency ω are
k = 80.0  m–1 and ω = 3.0 s–1
We, then, relate the wavelength λ to k through
Eq. (14.6),
λ = 2π/k
   
1
80.0 m
2π
−
=
=  7.85 cm
(c)
Now, we relate T to ω by the relation
T = 2π/ω
                   
1
3.0 s
2π
−
=
                    = 2.09 s
and frequency, v  = 1/T = 0.48 Hz
The displacement y at x = 30.0 cm and
time t = 20 s is given by
y  = (0.005 m) sin (80.0 × 0.3 – 3.0 × 20)
            = (0.005 m) sin (–36 + 12π)
 = (0.005 m) sin (1.699)
            = (0.005 m) sin (970) j 5 mm  
 ⊳
14.4   THE SPEED OF A TRAVELLING WAVE
To determine the speed of propagation of a
travelling wave, we can fix our attention on any
particular point on the wave (characterised by
some value of the phase) and see how that point
moves in time. It is convenient to look at the
motion of the crest of the wave. Fig. 14.8 gives
the shape of the wave at two instants of time,
which differ by a small time internal ∆t. The
entire wave pattern is seen to shift to the right
(positive direction of x-axis) by a distance ∆x. In
particular, the crest shown by a dot (• ) moves a
distance ∆x in time ∆t. The speed of the wave is
then ∆x/∆t. We can put the dot (• ) on a point
with any other phase. It will move with the same
speed v (otherwise the wave pattern will not
remain fixed). The motion of a fixed phase point
on the wave is given by
kx – ωt = constant
(14.10)
Thus, as time t changes, the position x of the
fixed phase point must change so that the phase
remains constant. Thus,
kx – ωt = k(x+∆x) – ω(t+∆t)
or k ∆x – ω ∆t =0
Taking ∆x, ∆t vanishingly small, this gives
ω
 =
=
d
 dx
v
t
k
(14.11)
Relating ω to T and k to λ, we get
2
2 /
πν
λ
λν
π λ
=
=
=
v
T
(14.12)
Eq. (14.12), a general relation for all progressive
waves, shows that in the time required for one full
oscillation by any constituent of the medium, the
wave pattern travels a distance equal to the
wavelength of the wave. It should be noted that
the speed of a mechanical wave is determined by
the inertial (linear mass density for strings, mass
density in general) and elastic properties (Young’s
modulus for linear media/ shear modulus, bulk
modulus) of the medium. The medium determines
Fig. 14.8 Progression of a harmonic wave from time
t  to t + ∆t. where ∆t is a small interval.
The wave pattern as a whole shifts to the
right. The crest of the wave (or a point with
any fixed phase) moves right by the distance
∆x in time ∆t.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 8 :
 WAVES
285
the speed; Eq. (14.12) then relates wavelength to
frequency for the given speed. Of course, as
remarked earlier, the medium can support both
transverse and longitudinal waves, which will have
different speeds in the same medium. Later in this
chapter, we shall obtain specific expressions for
the speed of mechanical waves in some media.
14.4.1
Speed of a Transverse Wave on
Stretched String
The speed of a mechanical wave is determined
by the restoring force setup in the medium when
it is disturbed and the inertial properties (mass
density) of the medium. The speed is expected to
be directly related to the former and inversely to
the latter. For waves on a string, the restoring
force is provided by the tension T in the string.
The inertial property will in this case be linear
mass density µ, which is mass m  of the string
divided by its length L. Using Newton’s Laws of
Motion, an exact formula for the wave speed on
a string can be derived, but this derivation is
outside the scope of this book. We shall,
therefore, use dimensional analysis. We already
know that dimensional analysis alone can never
yield the exact formula. The overall
dimensionless constant is always left
undetermined by dimensional analysis.
The dimension of µ is [ML–1] and that of T is
like force, namely [MLT–2]. We need to combine
these dimensions to get the dimension of speed
v [LT–1]. Simple inspection shows that the
quantity T/µ has the relevant dimension
[
]
2
2
2
MLT
L T
ML
−
−






= 

Thus if T and µ are assumed to be the only
relevant physical quantities,
v  = C 
T
µ
(14.13)
where C is the undetermined constant of
dimensional analysis. In the exact formula, it
turms out, C=1. The speed of transverse waves
on a stretched string is given by
v  = 
µ
T
  (14.14)
Note the important point that the speed v
depends only on the properties of the medium T
and µ (T is a property of the stretched string
arising due to an external force). It does not
depend on wavelength or frequency of the wave
itself. In higher studies, you will come across
waves whose speed is not independent of
frequency of the wave. Of the two parameters λ
and ν the source of disturbance determines the
frequency of the wave generated. Given the
speed of the wave in the medium and the
frequency Eq. (14.12) then fixes the wavelength
v
λ
ν
  = 
(14.15)
u
u
u
u
u Example 14.3 A steel wire 0.72 m long
has a mass of 5.0 ×10–3 kg. If the wire is
under a tension of 60 N, what is the speed
of transverse waves on the wire ?
Answer Mass per unit length of the wire,
m
 
72
.
0
kg
 
10
0
.
5
3
−
×
=
µ
   = 6.9 ×10–3 kg m–1
Tension, T = 60 N
The speed of wave on the wire is given by
 
1
1
3
m 
 
93
m
kg 
10
9
.
6
N
 
60
−
−
−
=
×
=
=
s
T
 
 
v
µ
 
 
⊳
14.4.2 Speed of a Longitudinal Wave
(Speed of Sound)
In a longitudinal wave, the constituents of the
medium oscillate forward and backward in the
direction of propagation of the wave. We have
already seen that the sound waves travel in the
form of compressions and rarefactions of small
volume elements of air.  The elastic property that
determines the stress under compressional
strain is the bulk modulus of the medium defined
by (see Chapter 8)
P
B  
V/V
∆
= −∆
(14.16)
Here, the change in pressure ∆P produces a
volumetric strain V
V
∆
. B has the same dimension
as pressure and given in SI units in terms of
pascal (Pa). The inertial property relevant for the
propagation of wave is the mass density ρ, with
dimensions [ML–3]. Simple inspection reveals
that quantity B/ρ has the relevant dimension:
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 9 :
 PHYSICS
286
2
2
2
2
3
ML T
L T
ML
−
−
−
−






= 





(14.17)
Thus, if B and ρ  are considered to be the only
relevant physical quantities,
v  = C 
B
ρ
(14.18)
where, as before, C is the undetermined constant
from dimensional analysis. The exact derivation
shows that C=1. Thus, the general formula for
longitudinal waves in a medium is:
v  = 
B
ρ
(14.19)
For a linear medium, like a solid bar, the
lateral expansion of the bar is negligible and we
may consider it to be only under longitudinal
strain. In that case, the relevant modulus of
elasticity is Young’s modulus, which has the
same dimension as the Bulk modulus.
Dimensional analysis for this case is the same
as before and yields a relation like Eq. (14.18),
with an undetermined C, which the exact
derivation shows to be unity. Thus, the speed of
longitudinal waves in a solid bar is given by
 v  = 
ρ
Y
(14.20)
where Y is the Young’s modulus of the material
of the bar. Table 14.1 gives the speed of sound
in some media.
Table 14.1 Speed of Sound in some Media
   Liquids and solids generally have higher speed
of sound than gases. [Note for solids, the speed
being referred to is the speed of longitudinal
waves in the solid]. This happens because they
are much more difficult to compress than gases
and so have much higher values of bulk modulus.
Now, see Eq. (14.19). Solids and liquids have
higher mass densities ( ρ ) than gases. But the
corresponding increase in both the modulus (B)
of solids and liquids is much higher. This is the
reason why the sound waves travel faster in
solids and liquids.
We can estimate the speed of sound in a gas
in the ideal gas approximation. For an ideal gas,
the pressure P, volume V and temperature T are
related by (see Chapter 10).
PV = NkBT
(14.21)
where N is the number of molecules in volume
V, kB is the Boltzmann constant and T the
temperature of the gas (in Kelvin). Therefore, for
an isothermal change it follows from Eq.(14.21)
that
V∆P + P∆V  = 0
or
P
V/V
P
 
=
∆
∆
−
Hence, substituting in Eq. (14.16), we have
B = P
Therefore, from Eq. (14.19) the speed of a
longitudinal wave in an ideal gas is given by,
v  = 
ρ
P
(14.22)
This relation was first given by Newton and
is known as Newton’s formula.
u
u
u
u
u Example 14.4  Estimate the speed of
sound in air at standard temperature and
pressure. The mass of 1 mole of air is
29.0 ×10–3 kg.
Answer We know that 1 mole of any gas occupies
22.4 litres at STP. Therefore, density of air at
STP is:
 ρo = (mass of one mole of air)/ (volume of one
mole of air at STP)
3
3
3
29.0
10
kg
22.4
10
m
 
−
−
×
=
×
=  1.29 kg  m–3
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 10 :
 WAVES
287
According to Newton’s formula for the speed
of sound in a medium, we get for the speed of
sound in air at STP,
 
= 280 m s–1   (14.23)
⊳
The result shown in Eq.(14.23) is about 15%
smaller as compared to the experimental value
of 331 m s–1 as given in Table 14.1. Where
did we go wrong ? If we examine the basic
assumption made by Newton that the pressure
variations in a medium during propagation of
sound are isothermal, we find that this is not
correct. It was pointed out by Laplace that the
pressure variations in the propagation of sound
waves are so fast that there is little time for the
heat flow to maintain constant temperature.
These variations, therefore, are adiabatic and
not isothermal. For adiabatic processes the ideal
gas satisfies the relation (see Section 11.8),
PV γ  = constant
i.e.
∆(PVγ )  = 0
or
P γ V γ –1 ∆V + V γ ∆P = 0
where γ is the ratio of two specific heats,
Cp/Cv.
Thus, for an ideal gas the adiabatic bulk
modulus is given by,
Bad = 
V/V
P
 ∆
∆
−
  =  γP
   The speed of sound is, therefore, from Eq.
(14.19), given by,
v = 
ρ
γ P
 
(14.24)
This modification of Newton’s formula is referred
to as the Laplace correction. For air
γ = 7/5. Now using Eq. (14.24) to estimate the speed
of sound in air at STP, we get a value 331.3 m s–1,
which agrees with the measured speed.
14.5 THE PRINCIPLE OF SUPERPOSITION
OF WAVES
What happens when two wave pulses travelling
in opposite directions cross each other
(Fig. 14.9)? It turns out that wave pulses
continue to retain their identities after they have
crossed. However, during the time they overlap,
the wave pattern is different from either of the
pulses. Figure 14.9 shows the situation when
two pulses of equal and opposite shapes move
towards each other. When the pulses overlap,
the resultant displacement is the algebraic sum
of the displacement due to each pulse. This is
known as the principle of superposition of waves.
According to this principle, each pulse moves
as if others are not present. The constituents of
the medium, therefore, suffer displacments due
to both and since the displacements can be
positive and negative, the net displacement is
an algebraic sum of the two. Fig. 14.9 gives
graphs of the wave shape at different times. Note
the dramatic effect in the graph (c); the
displacements due to the two pulses have exactly
cancelled each other and there is zero
displacement throughout.
    To put the principle of superposition
mathematically, let y1 (x,t) and y2 (x,t) be the
displacements due to two wave disturbances in
the medium. If the waves arrive in a region
simultaneously, and therefore, overlap, the net
displacement y (x,t) is given by
y     (x, t) =  y1(x, t) +  y2(x, t)
(14.25)
If we have two or more waves moving in the
medium the resultant waveform is the sum of
wave functions of individual waves. That is, if
the wave functions of the moving waves are
Fig. 14.9 Two pulses having equal and opposite
displacements moving in opposite
directions. The overlapping pulses add up
to zero displacement in curve (c).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 11 :
 PHYSICS
288
y1 = f1(x–vt),
y2 = f2(x–vt),
..........
           ..........
           yn = fn (x–vt)
then the wave function describing the
disturbance in the medium is
y = f1(x – vt)+ f2(x – vt)+  ...+ fn(x – vt)
   
(
)
=1
i
n
 
f  x
vt
i
=
−
∑
(14.26)
The principle of superposition is basic to the
phenomenon of interference.
For simplicity, consider two harmonic
travelling waves on a stretched string, both with
the same ω (angular frequency) and k (wave
number), and, therefore, the same wavelength
λ. Their wave speed will be identical. Let us
further assume that their amplitudes are equal
and they are both travelling in the positive
direction of x-axis. The waves only differ in their
initial phase. According to Eq. (14.2), the two
waves are described by the functions:
y1(x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt)
(14.27)
and y2(x, t) =  a sin (kx – ωt + φ )
(14.28)
The net displacement is then, by the principle
of superposition, given by
y  (x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt) + a sin (kx – ωt + φ)
(14.29)
(
) (
)
2sin
cos
2
2
kx
t
kx
t
a
ω
ω
φ
φ


−
+
−
+


=










(14.30)
where we have used the familiar trignometric
identity for sin
sin
A
B
+
. We then have
(
)
,
2
cos
sin
2
2
y x t
a
kx
t
φ
φ
ω


=
−
+




(14.31)
Eq. (14.31) is also a harmonic travelling wave in
the positive direction of x-axis, with the same
frequency and wavelength. However, its initial
phase angle is 2
φ
. The significant thing is that
its amplitude is a function of the phase difference
φ between the constituent two waves:
A(φ)  =  2a cos ½φ
(14.32)
For φ = 0, when the waves are in phase,
(
)
(
)
,
2
sin
y x t
a
kx
t
ω
=
−
(14.33)
i.e., the resultant wave has amplitude 2a, the
largest possible value for A. For φ
π
=
, the
waves are completely, out of phase and the
resultant wave has zero displacement
everywhere at all times
y   (x, t)  = 0
(14.34)
Eq. (14.33) refers to the so-called constructive
interference of the two waves where the
amplitudes add up in the resultant wave. Eq.
(14.34) is the case of destructive intereference
where the amplitudes subtract out in the
resultant wave. Fig. 14.10 shows these two cases
of interference of waves arising from the
principle of superposition.
14.6
REFLECTION OF WAVES
So far we considered waves propagating in an
unbounded medium. What happens if a pulse
or a wave meets a boundary? If the boundary is
rigid, the pulse or wave gets reflected. The
Fig. 14.10 The resultant of two harmonic waves of
equal amplitude and wavelength
according to the principle of superposition.
The amplitude of the resultant wave
depends on the phase difference φ, which
is zero  for (a) and π for (b)
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 12 :
 WAVES
289
If on the other hand, the boundary point is
not rigid but completely free to move (such as in
the case of a string tied to a freely moving ring
on a rod), the reflected pulse has the same phase
and amplitude (assuming no energy dissipation)
as the incident pulse. The net maximum
displacement at the boundary is then twice the
amplitude of each pulse. An example of non- rigid
boundary is the open end of an organ pipe.
To summarise, a travelling wave or pulse
suffers a phase change of π on reflection at a
rigid boundary and no phase change on
reflection at an open boundary. To put this
mathematically, let the incident travelling
wave be
(
)
(
)
2
,
sin
ω
=
−
y
x t
a
kx
t
At a rigid boundary, the reflected wave is given
by
yr(x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt + π).
   = – a sin (kx – ωt)
(14.35)
At an open boundary, the reflected wave is given
by
yr(x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt + 0).
   = a sin (kx – ωt)
(14.36)
Clearly, at the rigid boundary, 
2
0
=
+
=
r
y
y
y
at all times.
14.6.1   Standing Waves and Normal Modes
We considered above reflection at one boundary.
But there are familiar situations (a string fixed
at either end or an air column in a pipe with
either end closed) in which reflection takes place
at two or more boundaries. In a string, for
example, a wave travelling in one direction will
get reflected at one end, which in turn will travel
and get reflected from the other end. This will
go on until there is a steady wave pattern set
up on the string. Such wave patterns are called
standing waves or stationary waves. To see this
mathematically, consider a wave travelling
along the positive direction of x-axis and a
reflected wave of the same amplitude and
wavelength in the negative direction of x-axis.
From Eqs. (14.2) and (14.4), with φ = 0, we get:
y1(x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt)
y2(x, t) = a sin (kx + ωt)
The resultant wave on the string is, according
to the principle of superposition:
y (x, t) =  y1(x, t) + y2(x, t)
phenomenon of echo is an example of reflection
by a rigid boundary. If the boundary is not
completely rigid or is an interface between two
different elastic media, the situation is some
what complicated. A part of the incident wave is
reflected and a part is transmitted into the
second medium. If a wave is incident obliquely
on the boundary between two different media
the transmitted wave is called the refracted
wave. The incident and refracted waves obey
Snell’s law of refraction, and the incident and
reflected waves obey the usual laws of
reflection.
Fig. 14.11 shows a pulse travelling along a
stretched string and being reflected by the
boundary. Assuming there is no absorption of
energy by the boundary, the reflected wave has
the same shape as the incident pulse but it
suffers a phase change of π or 1800 on reflection.
This is because the boundary is rigid and the
disturbance must have zero displacement at all
times at the boundary. By the principle of
superposition, this is possible only if the reflected
and incident waves differ by a phase of π, so that
the resultant displacement is zero. This
reasoning is based on boundary condition on a
rigid wall. We can arrive at the same conclusion
dynamically also. As the pulse arrives at the wall,
it exerts a force on the wall. By Newton’s Third
Law, the wall exerts an equal and opposite force
on the string generating a reflected pulse that
differs by a phase of π.
Fig. 14.11 Reflection of a pulse meeting a rigid
boundary.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 13 :
 PHYSICS
290
= a [sin (kx – ωt) + sin (kx + ωt)]
Using the familiar trignometric identity
Sin (A+B) + Sin (A–B) = 2 sin A cosB we get,
y (x, t) = 2a sin kx cos ωt
(14.37)
Note the important difference in the wave
pattern described by Eq. (14.37) from that
described by Eq. (14.2) or Eq. (14.4). The terms
kx and ωt appear separately, not in the
combination kx - ωt. The amplitude of this wave
is 2a sin kx. Thus, in this wave pattern, the
amplitude varies from point-to-point, but each
element of the string oscillates with the same
angular frequency ω or time period. There is no
phase difference between oscillations of different
elements of the wave. The string as a whole
vibrates in phase with differing amplitudes at
different points. The wave pattern is neither
moving to the right nor to the left. Hence, they
are called standing or stationary waves. The
amplitude is fixed at a given location but, as
remarked earlier, it is different at different
locations. The points at which the amplitude is
zero (i.e., where there is no motion at all) are
nodes; the points at which the amplitude is the
largest are called antinodes. Fig. 14.12 shows
a stationary wave pattern resulting from
superposition of two travelling waves in
opposite directions.
The most significant feature of stationary
waves is that the boundary conditions constrain
the possible wavelengths or frequencies of
vibration of the system. The system cannot
oscillate with any arbitrary frequency (contrast
this with a harmonic travelling wave), but is
characterised by a set of natural frequencies or
normal modes of oscillation. Let us determine
these normal modes for a stretched string fixed
at both ends.
First, from Eq. (14.37), the positions of nodes
(where the amplitude is zero) are given by
sin kx = 0 .
which implies
kx = nπ;   n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...
Since, k = 2π/λ , we get
x = 
λ
2
n
 ; n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...
       (14.38)
Fig. 14.12 Stationary waves arising from superposition of two harmonic waves travelling in opposite directions.
Note that the positions of zero displacement (nodes) remain fixed at all times.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 14 :
 WAVES
291
Clearly, the distance between any two
successive nodes is λ
2 . In the same way, the
positions of antinodes (where the amplitude is
the largest) are given by the largest value of sin
kx :
sin k x = 1
which implies
kx = (n + ½) π ; n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...
With k = 2π/λ, we get
 x = (n + ½) 2
λ  ; n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...                (14.39)
Again the distance between any two consecutive
antinodes is 2
λ . Eq. (14.38) can be applied to
the case of a stretched string of
length L fixed at both ends. Taking
one end to be at x = 0, the boundary
conditions are that x = 0 and x = L
are positions of nodes. The x = 0
condition is already satisfied. The
x = L node condition requires that
the length L is related to λ by
L = n 2
λ ;     n = 1, 2, 3, ...        (14.40)
Thus, the possible wavelengths of
stationary waves are constrained
by the relation
λ  = 2L
n
;    n = 1, 2, 3, …   (14.41)
with corresponding frequencies
v =  
2L
nv , for  n = 1, 2, 3,   (14.42)
We have thus obtained the natural
frequencies - the normal modes of
oscillation of the system. The lowest
possible natural frequency of a
system is called its fundamental
mode or the first harmonic. For the
stretched string fixed at either end
it is given by v = 
v
L
2
, corresponding
to n = 1 of Eq. (14.42). Here v is the
speed of wave determined by the properties of
the medium. The n = 2 frequency is called the
second harmonic; n = 3 is the third harmonic
and so on. We can label the various harmonics by
the symbol νn ( n = 1, 2, ...).
Fig. 14.13 shows the first six harmonics of a
stretched string fixed at either end. A string
need not vibrate in one of these modes only.
Generally, the vibration of a string will be a
superposition of different modes; some modes
may be more strongly excited and some less.
Musical instruments like sitar or violin are
based on this principle. Where the string is
plucked or bowed, determines which modes are
more prominent than others.
Let us next consider normal modes of
oscillation of an air column with one end closed
Fig. 14.13  The first six harmonics of vibrations of a stretched
string fixed at both ends.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 15 :
 PHYSICS
292
and the other open. A glass tube partially filled
with water illustrates this system. The end in
contact with water is a node, while the open end
is an antinode. At the node the pressure
changes are the largest, while the displacement
is minimum (zero). At the open end - the
antinode, it is just the other way - least pressure
change and maximum amplitude of
displacement. Taking the end in contact with
water to be x = 0, the node condition (Eq. 14.38)
is already satisfied. If the other end x = L is an
antinode, Eq. (14.39) gives
L =   n +




1
2
 2
λ , for n = 0, 1, 2, 3, …
The possible wavelengths are then restricted by
the relation :
λ  = 
(
)
2
1
2
L
n 
 
+
/
,  for n = 0, 1, 2, 3,...
(14.43)
The normal modes – the natural frequencies –
of the system are
ν  =  n +




1
2
2
v
L ; n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...
(14.44)
The fundamental frequency corresponds to n = 0,
and is given by v
L
4
 . The higher frequencies
are odd harmonics, i.e., odd multiples  of the
fundamental frequency : 3 v
L
4
, 5 v
L
4
, etc.
Fig. 14.14 shows the first six odd harmonics of
air column with one end closed and the other
open. For a pipe open at both ends, each end is
an antinode. It is then easily seen that an open
air column at both ends generates all harmonics
(See Fig. 14.15).
The systems above, strings and air columns,
can also undergo forced oscillations (Chapter
13). If the external frequency is close to one of
the natural frequencies, the system shows
resonance.
Normal modes of a circular membrane rigidly
clamped to the circumference as in a tabla are
determined by the boundary condition that no
point on the circumference of the membrane
vibrates. Estimation of the frequencies of normal
modes of this system is more complex. This
problem involves wave propagation in two
dimensions. However, the underlying physics is
the same.
u
u
u
u
u Example 14.5  A pipe, 30.0 cm long, is open
at both ends. Which harmonic mode of the
pipe resonates a 1.1 kHz source?  Will
resonance with the same source be
observed if one end of the pipe is closed ?
Take the speed of sound in air as
330 m s–1.
Answer  The first harmonic frequency is given
by
                ν1 = 
L
v
v
2
 
 
1
=
λ
     (open pipe)
where L is the length of the pipe. The frequency
of its nth harmonic is:
νn = 
L
nv
2
, for n = 1, 2, 3, ... (open pipe)
First few modes of an open pipe are shown in
Fig. 14.15.
For L = 30.0 cm, v = 330 m s–1,
νn = 
1
 330 (m s
)
0.6 (m)
−
n
 = 550 n s–1
Clearly, a source of frequency 1.1 kHz will
resonate at v2, i.e. the second harmonic.
Fundamental
or
third
fifth
first harmonic
harmonic
harmonic
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 16 :
 WAVES
293
while tuning their instruments with each other.
They go on tuning until their sensitive ears do
not detect any beats.
To see this mathematically, let us consider
two harmonic sound waves of nearly equal
angular frequency ω1 and ω2 and fix the location
to be x = 0 for convenience. Eq. (14.2) with a
suitable choice of phase (φ = π/2 for each) and,
assuming equal amplitudes, gives
 s1 = a  cos ω1t   and  s2 = a  cos ω2t         (14.45)
Here we have replaced the symbol y by s,
since we are referring to longitudinal not
transverse displacement. Let ω1 be the (slightly)
greater of the two frequencies. The resultant
displacement is, by the principle of
superposition,
s =  s1 + s2 = a (cos ω1 t + cos ω2 t)
Using the familiar trignometric identity for
cos A + cosB, we get
(
)
(
)
1
2
1
2
 2 
cos
 cos
2
2
t
t
a
ω
ω
ω
ω
 
 
-
+
=
(14.46)
which may be written as :
s = [2 a  cos ωb t ] cos ωat
(14.47)
If |ω1 – ω2| <<ω1, ω2, ωa >> ωb, th
where
ωb = (
)
1
2
2
ω
ω
 −
 and  ωa = (
)
1
2
2
ω
ω
 +
Now if we assume |ω1 – ω2| <<ω1, which means
ωa >> ωb, we can interpret Eq. (14.47) as follows.
The resultant wave is oscillating with the average
angular frequency ωa; however its amplitude is
not constant in time, unlike a pure harmonic
wave. The amplitude is the largest when the
term cos ωb t takes its limit +1 or –1. In other
words, the intensity of the resultant wave waxes
and wanes with a frequency which is 2ωb = ω1 –
Fig. 14.14 Normal modes of an air column open at
one end and closed at the other end. Only
the odd harmonics are seen to be possible.
seventh
ninth
eleventh
harmonic
harmonic
harmonic
Now if one end of the pipe is closed (Fig. 14.15),
it follows from Eq. (14.15) that the fundamental
frequency is
ν1 =  
L
v
v
4
 
 
1
=
λ
 (pipe closed at one end)
and only the odd numbered harmonics are
present :
ν3 = 3
4
v
L ,  ν5 = 5
4
v
L , and so on.
For L = 30 cm and v = 330 m s–1, the
fundamental frequency of the pipe closed at one
end is 275 Hz and the source frequency
corresponds to its fourth harmonic. Since this
harmonic is not a possible mode, no resonance
will be observed with the source, the moment
one end is closed.
⊳
14.7   BEATS
‘Beats’ is an interesting phenomenon arising
from interference of waves. When two harmonic
sound waves of close (but not equal) frequencies
are heard at the same time, we hear a sound of
similar frequency (the average of two close
frequencies), but we hear something else also.
We hear audibly distinct waxing and waning of
the intensity of the sound, with a frequency
equal to the difference in the two close
frequencies. Artists use this phenomenon often
Fig. 14.15 Standing waves in an open pipe, first four
harmonics are depicted.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 17 :
 PHYSICS
294
ω2. Since  ω = 2πν, the beat frequency νbeat, is
given by
νbeat = ν1 – ν2
(14.48)
Fig. 14.16 illustrates the phenomenon of
beats for two harmonic waves of frequencies 11
Hz and 9 Hz. The amplitude of the resultant wave
shows beats at a frequency of 2 Hz.
u
u
u
u
u Example 14.6  Two sitar strings A and B
playing the note ‘Dha’ are slightly out of
tune and produce beats of frequency 5 Hz.
The tension of the string B is slightly
increased and the beat frequency is found
to decrease to 3 Hz. What is the original
frequency of B if the frequency of A is
427 Hz ?
Answer Increase in the tension of a string
increases its frequency. If the original frequency
of B (νB) were greater than that of A (νA ), further
increase in νB should have resulted in an
increase in the beat frequency. But the beat
frequency is found to decrease. This shows that
νB < νA. Since νA – νB = 5 Hz, and νA = 427 Hz, we
get νB = 422 Hz.
⊳
Musical Pillars
Temples often have some pillars portraying
human figures playing musical instru-
ments, but seldom do these pillars
themselves produce music. At the
Nellaiappar temple in Tamil Nadu, gentle
taps on a cluster of pillars carved out of a
single piece of rock produce the basic notes
of Indian classical music, viz. Sa, Re, Ga,
Ma, Pa, Dha, Ni, Sa. Vibrations of these
pillars depend on elasticity of the stone used,
its density and shape.
Musical pillars are categorised into three
types: The first is called the Shruti Pillar,
as it can produce the basic notes —  the
“swaras”. The second type is the Gana
Thoongal, which generates the basic tunes
that make up the “ragas”. The third variety
is the Laya Thoongal pillars that produce
“taal” (beats) when tapped. The pillars at the
Nellaiappar temple are a combination of the
Shruti and Laya types.
Archaeologists date the Nelliappar
temple to the 7th century and claim it was
built by successive rulers of the Pandyan
dynasty.
The musical pillars of Nelliappar and
several other temples in southern India like
those at Hampi (picture), Kanyakumari, and
Thiruvananthapuram are unique to the
country and have no parallel in any other
part of the world.
Fig. 14.16 Superposition of two harmonic waves, one
of frequency 11 Hz (a), and the other of
frequency 9Hz (b), giving rise to beats of
frequency 2 Hz, as shown in (c).
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 18 :
 WAVES
295
SUMMARY
1.
Mechanical waves can exist in material media and are governed by Newton’s Laws.
2.
Transverse waves are waves in which the particles of the medium oscillate perpendicular
to the direction of wave propagation.
3.
Longitudinal waves are waves in which the particles of the medium oscillate along the
direction of wave propagation.
4.
Progressive wave is a wave that moves from one point of medium to another.
5.
The displacement in a sinusoidal wave propagating in the positive x direction is given
by
y (x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt + φ)
where a is the amplitude of the wave, k is the angular wave number, ω is the angular
frequency, (kx – ωt + φ) is the phase, and φ is the phase constant or phase angle.
6.
Wavelength λ of a progressive wave is the distance between two consecutive points of
the same phase at a given time. In a stationary wave, it is twice the distance between
two  consecutive nodes or antinodes.
7.
Period T of oscillation of a wave is defined as the time any element of the medium
takes to move through one complete oscillation. It is related to the angular frequency ω
through the relation
T = 2π
ω
8.
Frequency v of a wave is defined as 1/T and is related to angular frequency by
2
ω
ν =
π
9.
Speed of a progressive wave is given by 
k
T
v
ω
λ
λν
=
=
=
10.
 The speed of a transverse wave on a stretched string is set by the properties of the
string. The speed on a string with tension T and linear mass density µ is
v =
T
µ
11.
Sound waves are longitudinal mechanical waves that can travel through solids, liquids,
or gases. The speed v of sound wave in a fluid having bulk modulus B and density ρ is
v
B
=
ρ
The speed of longitudinal waves in a metallic bar is
v
Y
=
ρ
For  gases,  since B = γP, the speed of sound is
v
P
=
γ
ρ
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 19 :
 PHYSICS
296
12.
When two or more waves traverse simultaneously in the same medium, the
displacement of any element of the medium is the algebraic sum of the displacements
due to each wave. This is known as the principle of superposition of waves
1
(  
 
)
n
i
i
y
f x
vt
=
=
−
∑
13.
Two sinusoidal waves on the same string exhibit interference, adding or cancelling
according to the principle of superposition. If the two are travelling in the same
direction and have the same amplitude a and frequency but differ in phase by a phase
constant φ, the result is a single wave with the same frequency ω :
y     (x, t)  = 2
1
2
1
2
a
kx
cos
sin
φ
ω
φ




−
+




 
t 
If φ = 0 or an integral multiple of 2π, the waves are exactly in phase and the interference
is constructive; if φ = π, they are exactly out of phase and the interference is destructive.
14.
A travelling wave, at a rigid boundary or a closed end, is reflected with a phase
reversal but the reflection at an open boundary takes place without any phase change.
For an incident wave
                           yi (x, t) = a sin (kx – ωt )
the reflected wave at a rigid boundary is
                         yr (x, t) = – a sin (kx + ωt )
For reflection at an open boundary
                       yr (x,t ) = a sin (kx + ωt)
15.
The interference of two identical waves moving in opposite directions produces standing
waves. For a string with fixed ends, the standing wave is given by
y (x, t) = [2a sin kx ] cos ωt
Standing waves are characterised by fixed locations of zero displacement called nodes
and fixed locations of maximum displacements called antinodes. The separation
between two consecutive nodes or antinodes is λ/2.
A stretched string of length L fixed at both the ends vibrates with frequencies given by
v  
,
2
=
n v
L
     n = 1, 2, 3, ...
The set of frequencies given by the above relation are called the normal modes of
oscillation of the system. The oscillation mode with lowest frequency is called the
fundamental mode or the first harmonic. The second harmonic is the oscillation mode
with n = 2 and so on.
A pipe of length L with one end closed and other end open (such as air columns)
vibrates with frequencies given by
v 
(
)
n
½  2L
v
=
+
,       n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...
The set of frequencies represented by the above relation are the normal modes of
oscillation of such a system. The lowest frequency given by v/4L is the fundamental
mode or the first harmonic.
16.
A string of length L fixed at both ends or an air column closed at one end and open
at the other end or open at both the ends, vibrates with certain frequencies called
their normal modes. Each of these frequencies is a resonant frequency of the system.
17.
Beats arise when two waves having slightly different frequencies, ν1 and ν2 and
comparable amplitudes, are superposed. The beat frequency is
νbeat = ν1 ~ ν2
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 20 :
 WAVES
297
POINTS TO PONDER
1.
A wave is not motion of matter as a whole in a medium.  A wind is different from the
sound wave in air.  The former involves motion of air from one place to the other.  The
latter involves compressions and rarefactions of layers of air.
2.
In a wave, energy and not the matter is transferred from one point to the other.
3.
In a mechanical wave, energy transfer takes place because of the coupling through
elastic forces between neighbouring oscillating parts of the medium.
4.
Transverse waves can propagate only in medium with shear modulus of elasticity,
Longitudinal waves need bulk modulus of elasticity and are therefore, possible in all
media, solids, liquids and gases.
5.
In a harmonic progressive wave of a given frequency, all particles have the same
amplitude but different phases at a given instant of time.  In a stationary wave, all
particles between two nodes have the same phase at a given instant but have different
amplitudes.
6.
Relative to an observer at rest in a medium the speed of a mechanical wave in that
medium (v) depends only on elastic and other properties (such as mass density) of
the medium. It does not depend on the velocity of the source.
EXERCISES
14.1
A string of mass 2.50 kg is under a tension of 200 N. The length of the stretched
string is 20.0 m. If the transverse jerk is struck at one end of the string, how long
does the disturbance take to reach the other end?
14.2
A stone dropped from the top of a tower of height 300 m splashes into the water of
a pond near the base of the tower. When is the splash heard at the top given that
the speed of sound in air is 340 m s–1 ? (g = 9.8 m s–2)
14.3
A steel wire has a length of 12.0 m and a mass of 2.10 kg. What should be the
tension in the wire so that speed of a transverse wave on the wire equals the speed
of sound in dry air at 20 °C = 343 m s–1.
14.4
Use the formula v
 
P
=
γ
ρ
to explain why the speed of sound in air
(a)
is independent of pressure,
(b)
increases with temperature,
(c)
increases with humidity.
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 21 :
 PHYSICS
298
14.5
You have learnt that a travelling wave in one dimension is represented by a function
y = f (x, t) where x and t must appear in the combination x – v t or x + v t, i.e.
y = f (x ± v t). Is the converse true? Examine if the following functions for y can
possibly represent a travelling wave :
(a)
(x – vt )2
(b)
log [(x + vt)/x0]
(c)
1/(x + vt)
14.6
A bat emits ultrasonic sound of frequency 1000 kHz in air. If the sound meets a
water surface, what is the wavelength of (a) the reflected sound, (b) the transmitted
sound? Speed of sound in air is 340 m s –1 and in water 1486 m s–1.
14.7
A hospital uses an ultrasonic scanner to locate tumours in a tissue. What is the
wavelength of sound in the tissue in which the speed of sound is 1.7 km s–1 ? The
operating frequency of the scanner is 4.2 MHz.
14.8
A transverse harmonic wave on a string is described by
                    y(x, t) = 3.0 sin (36  t + 0.018 x + π/4)
where x and y are in cm and t in s. The positive direction of x is from left to right.
(a)
Is this a travelling wave or a stationary wave ?
If it is travelling, what are the speed and direction of its propagation ?
(b)
What are its amplitude and frequency ?
(c)
What is the initial phase at the origin ?
(d)
What is the least distance between two successive crests in the wave ?
14.9
For the wave described in Exercise 14.8, plot the displacement (y) versus (t) graphs
for x = 0, 2 and 4 cm. What are the shapes of these graphs? In which aspects does
the oscillatory motion in travelling wave differ from one point to another: amplitude,
frequency or phase ?
14.10   For the travelling harmonic wave
y(x, t) = 2.0 cos 2π (10t – 0.0080 x + 0.35)
where x and y are in cm and t in s. Calculate the phase difference between oscillatory
motion of two points separated by a distance of
(a)
4 m,
(b)
0.5 m,
(c)
λ/2,
(d)
3λ/4
14.11
The transverse displacement of a string (clamped at its both ends) is given by
y(x, t) = 0.06 sin 
2
3
π x



 cos (120 πt)
where x and y are in m and t in s. The length of the string is 1.5 m and its mass is
3.0 ×10–2 kg.
Answer the following :
(a)
Does the function represent a travelling wave or a stationary wave?
(b)
Interpret the wave as a superposition of two waves travelling in opposite
directions. What is the wavelength, frequency, and speed of each wave ?
2024-25


 Book : class_11_physics_2 - Chapter : chapter 07 - Page 22 :
 WAVES
299
(c)
Determine the tension in the string.
14.12
(i) For the wave on a string described in Exercise 15.11, do all the points on the
string oscillate with the same (a) frequency, (b) phase, (c) amplitude? Explain
your answers. (ii) What is the amplitude of a point 0.375 m away from one end?
14.13
Given below are some functions of x and t to represent the displacement (transverse
or longitudinal) of an elastic wave. State which of these represent (i) a travelling
wave, (ii) a stationary wave or (iii) none at all:
(a)
y = 2 cos (3x) sin (10t)
(b)
y 
x 
 vt 
=
−
2
(c)
y = 3 sin (5x – 0.5t) + 4 cos (5x – 0.5t)
(d)
y = cos x sin t + cos 2x sin 2t
14.14
A wire stretched between two rigid supports vibrates in its fundamental mode with
a frequency of 45 Hz. The mass of the wire is 3.5 × 10–2  kg and its linear mass density
is 4.0 × 10–2 kg m–1. What is (a) the speed of a transverse wave on the string, and
(b) the tension in the string?
14.15
A metre-long tube open at one end, with a movable piston at the other end, shows
resonance with a fixed frequency source  (a tuning fork of frequency 340 Hz) when
the tube length is 25.5 cm or 79.3 cm. Estimate the speed of sound in air at the
temperature of the experiment. The edge effects may be neglected.
14.16
A steel rod 100 cm long is clamped at its middle. The fundamental frequency of
longitudinal vibrations of the rod are given to be 2.53 kHz. What is the speed of
sound in steel?
14.17
A pipe 20 cm long is closed at one end. Which harmonic mode of the pipe is
resonantly excited by a 430 Hz source ? Will the same source be in resonance with
the pipe if both ends are open? (speed of sound in air is 340 m s–1).
14.18
Two sitar strings A and B playing the note ‘Ga’ are slightly out of tune and produce
beats of frequency 6 Hz. The tension in the string A is slightly reduced and the
beat  frequency is found to reduce to 3 Hz. If the original frequency of A is 324 Hz,
what is the frequency of B?
14.19
Explain why (or how):
(a)
in a sound wave, a displacement node is a pressure antinode and vice versa,
(b)
bats can ascertain distances, directions, nature, and sizes of the obstacles
without any “eyes”,
(c)
a violin note and sitar note may have the same frequency, yet we can
distinguish between the two notes,
(d)
solids can support both longitudinal and transverse waves, but only
longitudinal waves can propagate in gases, and
(e)
the shape of a pulse gets distorted during propagation in a dispersive medium.
2024-25
